CRYPTOECONOMICS

FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF BITCOIN

![](media/image1.png){width="4.258064304461942in"
height="5.697465004374453in"}

ERIC VOSKUIL

Edited & Illustrated by James Chiang

CRYPTOECONOMICS

Fundamental Principles of Bitcoin

Eric Voskuil

**Cryptoeconomics, Fundamental Principles of Bitcoin, 2nd Edition\
**Copyright Â©2020 Eric Voskuil**\
**Version 1.2.1, Portable Document Format (PDF)

**Publisher**\
Published in the United States by Eric Voskuil

**Author**\
Eric Voskuil

**Editor & Illustrator**\
James Chiang

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any
manner without written permission from the author, except in the case of
brief quotations included in articles and reviews. For additional
information, please contact the author at <eric@voskuil.org>.

Although this publication is designed to provide accurate information,
the author assumes no responsibility for errors, inaccuracies,
omissions, or any other inconsistencies herein.

**ISBN**: 978-1-7350608-3-5

![](media/image3.png){width="2.0in" height="1.25in"}

## Author

Eric Voskuil

Eric Voskuil is a major contributor to
[Libbitcoin](https://libbitcoin.info/)[^1], a free and open source high
performance Bitcoin developer toolkit. Eric graduated from [Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute](https://rpi.edu/)[^2] with a degree in Computer
Science, selling his first start-up company,
[DesktopStandard](http://desktopstandard.com/)[^3], to
[Microsoft](https://microsoft.com/)[^4] and his second,
[BeyondTrust](https://beyondtrust.com/)[^5], to [Veritas
Capital](https://veritascapital.com/)[^6]. He has worked in core Bitcoin
development since early 2014 and speaks at conferences and meet-ups
globally. He is also a serial entrepreneur, angel investor, martial
artist, avid motorcyclist, world traveler, and former [U.S.
Navy](https://www.navy.mil/)[^7] fighter pilot.

In early 2020 he held [CryptoEcon](https://cryptoecon.org/)[^8] in
Hanoi, the first conference dedicated to cryptoeconomic theory,
co-founded the [Libbitcoin
Institute](https://libbitcoininstitute.org/)[^9] to help finance core
Bitcoin development and education, sponsored the first
[Bitbikers](https://bitbikers.org/)[^10] ride across Northern Vietnam
and published the first edition of *Cryptoeconomics*.

## Editor & Illustrator

James Chiang

James is an open-source contributor to both
[Libbitcoin](https://libbitcoin.info/)[^11] and [Bitcoin
Core](https://bitcoincore.org/)[^12] projects. He read his first
*Cryptoeconomics* chapter, the [Dedicated Cost
Principle](#dedicated-cost-principle)[^13], in early 2018 and began
sketching visuals to support his study of the underlying principles. He
is currently conducting research on the formal security of smart
contracts. James is a PhD candidate in computer science at the
[Technical University of Denmark](https://www.dtu.dk/english)[^14] and a
former Jet Propulsion Lab aerospace engineer.

## Acknowledgements

This project began as [tweets](https://twitter.com)[^15] and then posts
to the [Libbitcoin](https://libbitcoin.info)[^16] software [repository
wiki](https://github.com/libbitcoin/libbitcoin-system/wiki/Cryptoeconomics)[^17].
Eventually there was enough content and interest that I started getting
requests for a book. Then came offers to translate. Finally **James
Chiang** attempted publication. He nearly completed assembly of the
first edition, including his own illustrations. His insightful questions
caused me to rethink the [Inflation
Principle](#inflation-principle)[^18], which led to an important
economic insight. Yet my constant additions and changes at the time made
completion nearly impossible. Eventually James moved on to bigger
things, but his work and illustrations inspired the eventual
publication. I can't thank him enough.

Over the past year **Fabrizio Armani** has been working on an Italian
translation. His feedback helped improve this edition. His discomfort
with the [Savings Relation](#_Savings_Relation)[^19] eventually caused
me to scale back its conclusion. I've been fortunate to have him as a
sounding board for this edition. I try to be my own strongest critic
when attempting to demonstrate a cryptoeconomic conclusion. But James
and Fabrizio have clearly demonstrated the value of working with another
committed party.

Bitcoin began for me with Libbitcoin. As soon as I got started I flew to
Spain to meet **Amir Taaki**. He had created the Libbitcoin community
and led the project until his [detour to
Rojava](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amir_Taaki)[^20]. He was
exceedingly patient with me as I was recovering my C++ skills and
learning the idiosyncrasies of Bitcoin. Libbitcoin is a special
community within the Bitcoin universe of core development, and Amir
deserves the credit for that. It was the attempt to reconcile the hype
around Bitcoin with what I knew from my experience with it that led to
*Cryptoeconomics*. Choices made in development relate directly to the
economic underpinnings. We needed to explain what we were doing to
ourselves and others. Ultimately his work and insights led to this work,
so it was fitting and much appreciated that he agreed to provide the
[Foreword](#foreword-1)[^21].

I often refer to **Phillip Mienk** as the smartest person I know. He was
hired into a [Microsoft](https://microsoft.com)[^22] pool out of the
prestigious [University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign Computer
Science](https://cs.illinois.edu)[^23] doctorate program. I was building
a new development team at the time. I wasn't keen on having to train the
college hire that Microsoft had dumped in my lap. I quickly realized how
lucky I was. When I left he joined me for a third startup, and on the
day that closed he joined me on Libbitcoin. He's been an instrumental
partner for the last decade, always able to go straight to the heart of
the most complex issues. I'm grateful for his support during some tough
times and ultimately for his contribution to this work.

**Neill Miller** somehow found Libbitcoin and has made major
contributions to our wallet and server interface code, and has
maintained our community servers for several years. **Kulpreet Singh**
tracked me down at [Baltic
Honeybadger](https://bh2019.hodlhodl.com)[^24] 2019 and picked my brain
on Libbitcoin. Since that time he's made major contributions to our
database test suite and has continued to work on design improvements in
the underlying store. Along with Phillip, Neill and Kulpreet have been
the backbone of Libbitcoin. Without their support it wouldn't be
possible for me to spend so much time writing words when I [should be
writing code](https://www.activism.net/cypherpunk/manifesto.html)[^25].

The [Libbitcoin Institute](https://libbitcoininstitute.org)[^26] is the
brainchild of **Thomas Pacchia**. Tom gathered myself and **Lucas
Betschart** to form the organization for the purpose of raising money to
fund Libbitcoin's [free
software](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_Software_Foundation)[^27]
development and Bitcoin education. He did all of the tedious work
required to obtain [501c3
status](https://www.irs.gov/charities-non-profits/charitable-organizations/exemption-requirements-501c3-organizations)[^28]
with the IRS. To date the IRS has not obliged, but the Institute remains
a vehicle for supporting work necessary to advance the [value
proposition](#value-proposition)[^29] of Bitcoin. Tom and Lucas have
been tremendous supporters and good friends.

The first edition of *Cryptoeconomics* was distributed only to attendees
at [CryptoEcon](https://cryptoecon.org/)[^30] 2020 in Hanoi. The intent
was to quickly release online for sale, but life got in the way. The
extras remain in a motorcycle shop on Tay Ho Street. But CryptoEcon, a
project of the Libbitcoin Institute, helped spread the word. The
contributions of [HODL Capital](https://www.hodl.capital/)[^31] (via
**Thomas Pacchia**) and [Lemniscap](https://lemniscap.com)[^32] (via
**Roderik van der Graaf**) made the conference possible. Tom sought me
out at [Building on Bitcoin](https://building-on-bitcoin.com)[^33] 2018
in Lisbon, and Roderik found me at Baltic Honeybadger 2019 in Riga. They
took the initiative, and inspired me to complete the book for the
conference.

The people who have contributed the most in terms of inspiring topics
and constructive criticism of ideas are too many to include. They
include conference and meetup organizers, podcast hosts, attendees and
listeners, and the seemingly endless stream of Twitter commentors. I've
discovered far more from investigating flawed ideas than from sound
ones. Yet without also having occasional voices of support this type of
thing is much harder to accomplish.

Finally, thank you to my friends and family for supporting me through a
difficult time.

# Contents

## Table of Contents

[Author iii](#author)

[Editor & Illustrator iv](#editor-illustrator)

[Acknowledgements v](#acknowledgements)

[Contents ix](#contents)

[Table of Contents xi](#table-of-contents)

[Foreword 1](#_Toc65336359)

[Foreword 3](#foreword-1)

[Preface 7](#_Toc65336361)

[Preface 9](#preface-1)

[Introduction 11](#_Toc65336363)

[Introduction 13](#introduction-1)

[Security Model 17](#security-model)

[Axiom of Resistance 19](#axiom-of-resistance)

[Censorship Resistance Property 21](#censorship-resistance-property)

[Centralization Risk 23](#centralization-risk)

[Cockroach Fallacy 25](#cockroach-fallacy)

[Consensus Property 27](#consensus-property)

[Cryptodynamic Principles 28](#cryptodynamic-principles)

[Custodial Risk Principle 30](#custodial-risk-principle)

[Hearn Error 32](#hearn-error)

[Hoarding Fallacy 34](#hoarding-fallacy)

[Jurisdictional Arbitrage Fallacy 36](#jurisdictional-arbitrage-fallacy)

[Other Means Principle 38](#other-means-principle)

[Patent Resistance Principle 41](#patent-resistance-principle)

[Permissionless Principle 42](#permissionless-principle)

[Prisoner's Dilemma Fallacy 43](#prisoners-dilemma-fallacy)

[Private Key Fallacy 47](#private-key-fallacy)

[Proof of Work Fallacy 48](#proof-of-work-fallacy)

[Public Data Principle 51](#public-data-principle)

[Qualitative Security Model 54](#qualitative-security-model)

[Risk Sharing Principle 58](#risk-sharing-principle)

[Social Network Principle 60](#social-network-principle)

[Threat Level Paradox 62](#threat-level-paradox)

[Value Proposition 64](#value-proposition)

[Statism 67](#statism)

[Fedcoin Objectives 69](#fedcoin-objectives)

[Inflationary Quality Fallacy 70](#inflationary-quality-fallacy)

[Reservation Principle 72](#reservation-principle)

[Reserve Currency Fallacy 75](#reserve-currency-fallacy)

[State Banking Principle 78](#state-banking-principle)

[Mining 85](#mining)

[ASIC Monopoly Fallacy 87](#asic-monopoly-fallacy)

[Balance of Power Fallacy 89](#balance-of-power-fallacy)

[Byproduct Mining Fallacy 92](#byproduct-mining-fallacy)

[Causation Fallacy 94](#causation-fallacy)

[Decoupled Mining Fallacy 96](#_Toc65336399)

[Dedicated Cost Principle 98](#dedicated-cost-principle)

[Efficiency Paradox 100](#efficiency-paradox)

[Empty Block Fallacy 101](#empty-block-fallacy)

[Energy Exhaustion Fallacy 104](#energy-exhaustion-fallacy)

[Energy Store Fallacy 106](#energy-store-fallacy)

[Energy Waste Fallacy 107](#energy-waste-fallacy)

[Fee Recovery Fallacy 109](#fee-recovery-fallacy)

[Halving Fallacy 110](#halving-fallacy)

[Impotent Mining Fallacy 112](#impotent-mining-fallacy)

[Miner Business Model 114](#miner-business-model)

[Pooling Pressure Risk 117](#pooling-pressure-risk)

[Proximity Premium Flaw 119](#proximity-premium-flaw)

[Relay Fallacy 121](#relay-fallacy)

[Selfish Mining Fallacy 124](#_Toc65336413)

[Side Fee Fallacy 126](#side-fee-fallacy)

[Spam Misnomer 129](#spam-misnomer)

[Variance Discount Flaw 131](#_Toc65336416)

[Zero Sum Property 133](#zero-sum-property)

[Alternatives 137](#alternatives)

[Bitcoin Labels 139](#bitcoin-labels)

[Blockchain Fallacy 141](#blockchain-fallacy)

[Brand Arrogation 143](#brand-arrogation)

[Consolidation Principle 144](#consolidation-principle)

[Dumping Fallacy 146](#dumping-fallacy)

[Fragmentation Principle 148](#_Toc65336424)

[Genetic Purity Fallacy 151](#genetic-purity-fallacy)

[Hybrid Mining Fallacy 153](#hybrid-mining-fallacy)

[Maximalism Definition 154](#maximalism-definition)

[Network Effect Fallacy 155](#network-effect-fallacy)

[Proof of Cost Fallacy 156](#proof-of-cost-fallacy)

[Proof of Memory FaÃ§ade 158](#proof-of-memory-faÃ§ade)

[Proof of Stake Fallacy 160](#proof-of-stake-fallacy)

[Replay Protection Fallacy 162](#replay-protection-fallacy)

[Shitcoin Definition 164](#_Toc65336433)

[Split Credit Expansion Fallacy 165](#split-credit-expansion-fallacy)

[Split Speculator Dilemma 167](#_Toc65336435)

[Economics 169](#economics)

[Credit Expansion Fallacy 171](#credit-expansion-fallacy)

[Depreciation Principle 178](#depreciation-principle)

[Expression Principle 182](#expression-principle)

[Full Reserve Fallacy 184](#full-reserve-fallacy)

[Inflation Principle 191](#inflation-principle)

[Labor and Leisure 198](#labor-and-leisure)

[Production and Consumption 202](#production-and-consumption)

[Pure Bank 204](#pure-bank)

[Savings Relation 211](#_Toc65336445)

[Speculative Consumption 218](#speculative-consumption)

[Subjective Inflation Principle 224](#subjective-inflation-principle)

[Time Preference Fallacy 225](#time-preference-fallacy)

[Money 229](#money)

[Collectible Tautology 231](#collectible-tautology)

[Debt Loop Fallacy 233](#_Toc65336451)

[Ideal Money Fallacy 237](#ideal-money-fallacy)

[Inflation Fallacy 240](#inflation-fallacy)

[Money Taxonomy 241](#money-taxonomy)

[Regression Fallacy 246](#regression-fallacy)

[Reserve Definition 249](#reserve-definition)

[Risk Free Return Fallacy 250](#risk-free-return-fallacy)

[Thin Air Fallacy 253](#thin-air-fallacy)

[Unlendable Money Fallacy 266](#_Toc65336459)

[Price 269](#price)

[Lunar Fallacy 271](#lunar-fallacy)

[Price Estimation 273](#price-estimation)

[Scarcity Fallacy 277](#scarcity-fallacy)

[Stability Property 280](#_Toc65336464)

[Stock to Flow Fallacy 283](#stock-to-flow-fallacy)

[Scalability 285](#scalability)

[Auditability Fallacy 287](#auditability-fallacy)

[Scalability Principle 288](#scalability-principle)

[Substitution Principle 291](#substitution-principle)

[Utility Threshold Property 293](#utility-threshold-property)

[Appendix 295](#appendix)

[Glossary of Terms 297](#glossary-of-terms)

# Foreword

## Foreword

By Amir Taaki

[Crypto-anarchy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crypto-anarchism)[^34] is
neither a strategy to impose a political hegemony nor discredit other
possible attitudes or agendas. It is merely a set of concepts or ideas
that can be used tactically to realize alternative modes of being.
History is the result of human will and action, but this always occurs
within a framework of convictions, belief and representation which
provide meaning and direction to any given pursuit. In this way,
crypto-anarchy seeks to arm the individual with powerful conceptual
tools to construct their own creative visions.

Economics is important since it is the study of the fundamental
mechanisms of human action and their consequences. Rational economics
analyzes human activity while accepting knowledge limitations. From a
simple set of assumptions, including that humans
[act](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Action_axiom)[^35] and prefer things
sooner than [later](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_preference)[^36],
theorems are derived using [rules of
inference](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule_of_inference)[^37]. The
result is powerful, as it is necessarily true under the assumptions. The
development of these theorems provides us with simple constructs we can
use to compartmentalize and analyze more complex phenomena.

[Cryptocurrency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptocurrency)[^38]
emerged from crypto-anarchy and free market economics, but since then
has outgrown its own roots and become a contemporary entity with
peculiar characteristics. This has forced us to revisit our own ideas
and assumptions about how these disciplines interrelate. This new field
of study is termed cryptoeconomics.

Cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin represent money which is simultaneously
global, uncensored, and open access for everybody, for the first time in
human history. There are also great advances being made in anonymization
technology, not only for cryptocurrency but for other financial
instruments and human activity. Cryptocurrency is therefore a unique
phenomenon with its own characteristics worthy of study.

The importance of economics lies in giving us a window to understand the
activities of human beings. This means we can make plans about where to
apply our resources and our technical knowledge. The current generation
of crypto companies lack this strategic dimension and will not be
prepared to take advantage of new geopolitical trends. Presently there
is too much divergence in focus -- the crypto industry is not selective
enough.

Concepts from evolutionary theory can help us to predict which kind of
organizational strategies will win-out in the longer term. For example,
[r/K-Selection
Theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/R/K_selection_theory)[^39]
explains that after major extinction events, the first organisms to
occupy niches are the species with high numbers of young that mature
quickly and have little investment of resources from the parents
[(r-selected)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/R/K_selection_theory)[^40].
However, they are edged out by organisms over the longer term, which
have fewer young that are better specialized for niches and take longer
to mature
[(K-selected)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/R/K_selection_theory)[^41].
These K-selected crypto-organisms are the ones that will be better
adapted to take advantage of new economic niches that are opening up.

Another hypothesis from evolutionary theory is the [Red Queen
hypothesis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red_Queen_hypothesis)[^42],
which is that organisms are in a constant battle to evolve. That is, we
must constantly adapt and evolve in a continually changing environment
with ever-evolving actors.

We do this through the process of applying our knowledge to find
patterns and build conceptual models, modifying those models in feedback
to improve their accuracy or augment their underlying paradigms.

The current crop of crypto companies will die out soon enough. In their
place, a new generation of organizations will emerge. These will be
highly adaptive, attuned to geopolitical trends, and optimized for
survival in a state of perpetual disequilibrium. To withstand such
conditions, this new generation should be founded on a synthesis that
combines the astuteness of crypto-economics and crypto-anarchy itself --
which is at its core a simple doctrine: the motor of historical change
is not simply technological innovation, but concepts, models and ideas
that give us power over material reality.

My experience with Eric goes back to 2013 when we began working on
[Bitcoin system software](https://github.com/libbitcoin)[^43] that was
both fast and scalable. Eric is a top tier developer who single-handedly
can do the work of an entire team to create production level software --
a very rare skill. He also has a wide-ranging life experiencing, having
flown jets for the U.S. Navy and started multiple successful companies.
He combines intense practical knowledge with a strong theoretical
underpinning and a deep interest and knowledge in politics and
economics.

Eric's unique insights into fundamental concepts provide us with a vital
framework to guide the future direction of the cryptoeconomics field. He
rigorously applies rational economic theory to cryptocurrency, and
ventures beyond the financial to explain how human activity shapes this
future.

# Preface

## Preface

This started as a way to avoid retyping the same ideas, 140
[characters](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Twitter)[^44] at a time. In
keeping with that environment, topics were as short as possible, and
informal. I did not intend to write a book, and still could not. Most of
the topics (including this one) were written on my phone, on a flight,
train or in a coffee shop. Many are quick observations that arise from
intimate knowledge of core Bitcoin code or long self-study and
experience in various disciplines.

Over time topics began to interact, a necessary taxonomy erupted, and
what had been a casual process of ad-hoc observation started to become
work. **The topics are as short as possible and assume some knowledge of
both Bitcoin and economics**. I made an honest effort to rationalize
relations and terminology, but my focus remains on
[consistency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Consistency)[^45] and
expansion of understanding. Fortunately, others have come along to help
with illustration, review and publication.

I have used the terms
[Catallactics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catallactics)[^46] and
[Praxeology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Praxeology)[^47] to describe
the underlying discipline. People also use the term [Austrian
Economics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Austrian_School)[^48]. I find
each of these unsatisfying, so have started referring to the discipline
as "Rational Economics" (not to be confused with economic
[rationalism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economic_rationalism)[^49]),
a system based entirely on deductive
[reasoning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deductive_reasoning)[^50] from
a set of [axioms](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axiom)[^51].

It was [Mises](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ludwig_von_Mises)[^52] who
explicitly established a system of economics on a rational basis, yet
this approach does not pervade the entire Austrian School (which
predates Mises).
[Rothbard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Murray_Rothbard)[^53] adds
rigor and clarity to Mises, deriving some important new conclusions. Yet
Mises (as most humans) makes [material
errors](#inflation-principle)[^54], which are unfortunately carried
forth by Rothbard. Other errors commonly amplified within the Austrian
School are clear misinterpretations.

In each case where Mises errs, he is critiquing [state fiat
money](#collectible-tautology)[^55]. In other words, he appears to
sacrifice his objectivity to his passion. Yet his rational system,
properly applied, easily exposes the errors. State money deserves
critique, and Bitcoiners rarely miss an opportunity. Yet it deserves
*accurate* critique; anything less is counterproductive. With correct
analysis, specific relevant forces can be identified, both in monopoly
fiat (e.g. Dollar) and in market fiat (e.g. Bitcoin). Such proper
analysis can limit the waste of precious capital on [irrational
propositions](#full-reserve-fallacy)[^56].

A strictly rational process not only exposes errors, but also produces
new and interesting [discoveries](#censorship-resistance-property)[^57]
and [simplifications](#depreciation-principle)[^58], not just in Bitcoin
but in economic theory generally. The topics form a graph, over which no
total ordering seems appropriate. The table of contents is a poorly
imposed order. While some attempt at progression has been made, I
recommend reading the topics as they were written, as a curiosity.

# Introduction

## Introduction

Do you think you know something about Bitcoin and [Austrian
Economics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Austrian_School)[^59]? If so
you may be ready for *Cryptoeconomics*. This is not a work for the
uninitiated. It is not a narrative and is free of opinion. The content
is dense -- it does not repeat itself. It is not a contribution to the
echo chamber, will not show you how to set up a wallet, the future
price, or what to do.

*Cryptoeconomics* applies rational economic principles to Bitcoin,
demonstrating flaws and unnecessary complexities in them, and in common
understandings of Bitcoin. It will improve your understanding of both.
Bitcoin requires a new, rigorous, and comprehensive discipline. **This
is it.**

Bitcoin is something new. It seems to defy understanding. Has there ever
been a fixed supply money? Is there another case of production cost
varying directly with product price? Is there anything else with a
competitive yet fixed rate of transactability? To see past the hype,
understand the value proposition, security model, and economic behavior,
this may be your only source.

Bitcoin is economics, technology, and security. Without incorporating
all of these aspects, errors will be made. Economists, technologists,
security experts, and even
[numerologists](https://twitter.com/100trillionusd)[^60] have attempted
to explain it. Each brings a limited perspective, failing to incorporate
essential aspects. The author found himself uniquely qualified to
integrate them.

His work in Bitcoin began with a hardware wallet. He spent a year
analyzing threats, working with electronics design, hardware
exploitation, and state surveillance experts. He chose the
[Libbitcoin](https://libbitcoin.info)[^61] software library, as
Satoshi's prototype was not factored for development and was largely
financed by the [Bitcoin
Foundation](https://bitcoinfoundation.org)[^62], a corporate consortium.
He later dedicated himself to Libbitcoin, eventually writing or editing
all of its \~500,000 lines of code. Few have comparable experience with
such a comprehensive Bitcoin stack.

As a combat-experienced fighter pilot in the [U.S.
Navy](https://www.navy.mil)[^63] he experienced state threats. He became
a highly-qualified [Strike Fighter Tactics
Instructor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_Navy_Strike_Fighter_Tactics_Instructor_program)[^64],
in which his primary role was tactics analysis and threat presentation.
He also advised for the Navy on the [Strike Fighter Training
System](https://www.globalsecurity.org/military/library/policy/navy/ntsp/SFTS.htm)[^65]
network, [Joint Strike
Fighter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joint_Strike_Fighter_program)[^66],
early [GPS
weapons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guided_bomb#Satellite)[^67], and
[F/A-18](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/McDonnell_Douglas_F/A-18_Hornet)[^68]
systems. His understanding of the physical nature of all security was
enhanced by decades of training in Japanese martial arts, achieving
black belt rankings in five disciplines.

His [degree](https://www.rpi.edu)[^69] and experience in computer
science mixed with extensive business experience, founding several
companies. He has worked at [IBM](https://ibm.com)[^70] and as a
Principal Architect at [Microsoft](https://microsoft.com)[^71], two of
the world's largest companies. The latter purchased his first startup,
and his second was acquired by [Veritas
Capital](https://www.veritascapital.com)[^72]. He was awarded three
related [U.S. patents](https://www.uspto.gov)[^73]. Eventually he became
an angel investor, sharing his experience with other entrepreneurs.

As [CTO](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chief_technology_officer)[^74] of
his first company he published three computer security advisories via
[Computer Emergency Response
Team](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CERT_Coordination_Center)[^75]. Each
was derived entirely from his reading of user documentation. Later he
earned a seat on the [DHS](https://dhs.gov)[^76] [Open Vulnerability
Assessment Language](https://oval.cisecurity.org)[^77] advisory board
for his work on software patching. In recent years he uncovered material
security flaws in each of the first three iterations of a popular
"secure element" hardware wallet, again from review of user
documentation.

Thirty years of self-study in free market economics was reinforced by
extensive global travel. In visiting over 80 countries he has interacted
with people on five continents. Still often traveling on a motorcycle
with only a shoulder bag, he obtains intimate understanding of global
economic realities. From Zimbabwean black market currency traders, to
Tanzanian coffee pickers, Venezuelan refugees, Mongolian shepherds,
Okinawan jazz musicians, Lao monks, etc. -- the world is not as often
presented.

The ability to integrate these diverse and relevant experiences led to
*Cryptoeconomics*. This is your next stop.

# Security Model

## Axiom of Resistance

In modern logic an [axiom](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axiom)[^78] is
a premise, it cannot be proven. It is a starting assumption against
which other things may be proven. For example, in [Euclidean
geometry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euclidean_geometry)[^79] one
cannot prove that parallel lines never meet. It simply defines the
particular geometry.

Proving statements about Bitcoin requires reliance on axiomatic systems,
specifically
[mathematics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zermelo%E2%80%93Fraenkel_set_theory)[^80],
[probability](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Probability_axioms)[^81] and
[catallactics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catallactics)[^82], and
therefore the assumptions upon which they rely. However Bitcoin also
relies on an axiom not found in these systems.

Satoshi alludes to this in an early
[statement](http://satoshi.nakamotoinstitute.org/emails/cryptography/4)[^83]:

> \>You will not find a solution to political problems in cryptography.\
> \
> Yes, but we can win a major battle in the arms race and gain a new
> territory of freedom for several years.\
> \
> Governments are good at cutting off the heads of a centrally
> controlled networks like Napster, but pure P2P networks like Gnutella
> and Tor seem to be holding their own.\
> \
> *Satoshi Thu Nov 6 15:15:40 EST 2008*

In other words, there is an assumption that it is *possible* for a
system to resist state control. This is not accepted as a fact but
deemed to be a reasonable assumption, due to the behavior of similar
systems, on which to base the system.

![](media/image4.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

**One who does not accept the axiom of resistance is contemplating an
entirely different system than Bitcoin.** If one assumes it is *not
possible* for a system to resist state controls, conclusions do not make
sense in the context of Bitcoin -- just as conclusions in [spherical
geometry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spherical_geometry)[^84]
contradict Euclidean. How can Bitcoin be
[permissionless](#permissionless-principle)[^85] or [censorship
resistant](#censorship-resistance-property)[^86] without the axiom? The
contradiction leads one to make [obvious errors](#hearn-error)[^87] in
an attempt to rationalize the conflict.

It is common for people to refer cynically to a Bitcoin-like system that
omits the resistance axiom as "just another PayPal", a designation not
without merit. [Confinity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Confinity)[^88]
originally attempted to create a system with a similar [value
proposition](#value-proposition)[^89] to Bitcoin. Having failed to do so
it discarded the axiom, building the
[PayPal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PayPal)[^90] we know today.

## Censorship Resistance Property

Resistance to [censorship](#Censorship) is a consequence of
[transaction](#Transaction) [fees](#Fee). Censorship
[enforcement](#Enforcement) is indistinguishable from [soft
fork](#Soft_Fork) enforcement, with [majority hash
power](#Majority_Hash_Power) rejecting non-censoring [blocks](#Block).
Without such enforcement transactions are [confirmed](#Confirmation) on
an economically-rational basis despite individual [miner](#Miner)
subjectivity.

A majority miner is financially profitable. As such there is no cost to
acquiring the means of censorship. As mining is necessarily an
[anonymous](#risk-sharing-principle)[^91] role it is always possible for
any actor to acquire and deploy majority hash power, and to control it
at any given time. As shown in [Proof of Work
Fallacy](#proof-of-work-fallacy)[^92], [hard forks](#Hard_Fork) cannot
be used to selectively evict the censor and instead accelerate
[coin](#Coin) collapse.

In the case of active censorship, fees may rise on transactions that
fail to confirm. This fee premium creates a greater potential profit for
miners who confirm censored transactions. At a sufficient level this
opportunity produces additional competition and therefore increasing
overall [hash rate](#Hash_Rate).

If rising non-censoring [hash power](#Hash_Power) exceeds that of the
censor, its enforcement fails. The censor is thus faced with the choice
of subsidizing operations or abandoning the effort. Only the
[state](#State) can perpetually subsidize operations, as it can compel
tax. At the same time it profits from preservation of its own currency
regime. **The state must consume taxes to at least the level of the fee
premium to maintain censorship enforcement.**

A coin without integrated fees would either fail to a censor or evolve a
side fee market. As shown in [Side Fee Fallacy](#side-fee-fallacy)[^93]
it is not necessary that fees be integrated, however fee integration is
an important anonymity technique. In either case censorship resistance
arises only from the fee premium. The [subsidy](#Subsidy) portion of the
block [reward](#Reward) does not contribute to censorship resistance
because the censor earns the same subsidy as other miners.

It is possible that censorship enforcement could result in a
[price](#Price) collapse, causing the censor to incur a loss on
operations. However in this case its objective has been achieved, with
no opportunity for the [economy](#Economy) to counter the censor. This
collapse might be achieved at negligible cost by simply demonstrating
the intent to censor. It is also possible that a censorship soft fork
could lead to a price *increase*, as white market business embraces the
associated state approval. Nevertheless, for the coin to survive, its
economy must continue to generate a fee premium sufficient to overpower
the censor.

It cannot be shown that the economy will generate sufficient fees to
overpower a censor. Similarly, it cannot be shown that a censor will be
willing and able to subsidize operations at any given level. It is
therefore not possible to prove censorship resistance. This is why
resistance to state control is [axiomatic](#axiom-of-resistance)[^94].

## Centralization Risk

Bitcoin [weakness](#qualitative-security-model)[^95] results from
[centralization](#Centralization) and from [pooling](#Political). Forces
that produce aggregated [mining](#Mine) are called [pooling
pressures](#pooling-pressure-risk)[^96]. While pooling weakens
[confirmation](#Confirmation) security, centralization weakens the
security of [consensus rules](#Consensus_Rules). Weakness is the result
of fewer [people](#Person) with whom to [share
risk](#risk-sharing-principle)[^97].

Consensus risk is shared among active [merchants](#Merchant) only, as
they are the people who have the ability to refuse [trade](#Trade) of
property for [units](#Unit) that fail to conform to their rules.
Financial forces that reduce the number of merchants are called
centralization pressures. The problem of [delegation](#Delegation) is
that it is commonly coupled with centralization, as is typical in web
[wallets](https://bitcoin.org/en/wallets/web)[^98]. The wallet not only
[owns](#Owner) the saved units but also controls
[validation](#Validation) of units received in trade. **The latter
reduces power over consensus rules to one person for all of the wallets
of the service.**

Centralization pressures include:

-   Difficulty of use discount.

-   On-chain settlement discount.

If [exchange](#Exchange) is difficult for a customer, the merchant must
discount merchandise in order to accept the [coin](#Coin). If exchange
is difficult for the merchant, an additional cost is incurred. When
referring payments to a trusted third party reduces the size of this
discount and/or cost, return on capital is increased.

[Transfer](#Transfer) incurs [fees](#Fee) which also requires a merchant
to discount merchandise. When using a trusted intermediary to settle
transfers off-[chain](#Chain) reduces fees, and thereby the discount,
merchant return on capital is increased.

Centralization manifests as:

-   Payment processors

-   Web and other trusting wallets

-   Hosted APIs for accessing the chain

In a [low threat](#threat-level-paradox)[^99] environment the merchant
has diminished financial incentive to subsidize Bitcoin security. As the
cost of
[alternatives](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_exchange_controls)[^100]
increases the discount becomes unavoidable. At this point the customer
decides to pay a higher price or the merchant closes the business as
capital seeks [market](#Market) rates of return.

## Cockroach Fallacy

There is a theory that [aggregation](#Aggregation) does not materially
reduce the security afforded by [risk
sharing](#risk-sharing-principle)[^101] because [miners](#Miner) and the
[economy](#Economy) will disperse as necessary, similar to the
scattering cockroaches disturbed by a light. **The theory irrationally
implies that security actually exists because it could exist.** This is
essentially a rejection of the [Threat Level
Paradox](#threat-level-paradox)[^102], which implies that security
evolves over time under a persistent threat.

![](media/image6.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

The theory relies on [grinders](#Grinder) switching miner allegiance.
This is based on the [Balance of Power
Fallacy](#balance-of-power-fallacy)[^103], which incorrectly models
miners as the threat. A shift of [hash power](#Hash_Power) from one
[mine](#Mine) to another does not reduce [pooling](#Political) or the
[risk associated](#risk-sharing-principle)[^104] with it. The risk is
that [states](#State) [co-opt](#Co_option) large amounts of hash power,
substantially reducing the cost of [attack](#Attack). It is an error to
assume that states do not
[collaborate](http://www.imf.org/external/index.htm)[^105] in defense of
[seigniorage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^106].

> The International Monetary Fund (IMF) is an organization of 189
> countries, working to foster global monetary cooperation\...\
> \
> *imf.org*

As such one cannot assume that any large mine can exist outside of state
[control](#threat-level-paradox)[^107]. A reduction in pooling requires
an increase in the number of miners, specifically those who are willing
and able to operate
[covertly](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/09/big-in-venezuela/534177/)[^108].
This requires that grinders suffer the increased cost associated with
reduced pooling.

Yet [people](#Person) cannot be expected to work against their own
financial interest. In order for risk sharing to increase, the financial
pressures against it must be reversed. An assumption to the contrary is
economically irrational.

The theory also ignores economic [centralization](#Centralization) and
[delegation](#Delegation). It is an error to assume the economy can
rapidly decentralize, and de-delegation would most likely be infeasible
in the case of state attacks as currency
[controls](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_exchange_controls)[^109]
commonly restrict [transfer](#Transfer).

## Consensus Property

[People](\l) generally think of [consensus](#Consensus) in the context
of a fixed membership, like a
[jury](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hung_jury)[^110]. In this model
consensus implies that all members must agree. **But because Bitcoin
membership is permissionless and therefore not fixed, there is always
complete agreement, as implied by membership.** In this model consensus
refers to the size of the membership ([economy](#Economy)), not a
condition of agreement.

![](media/image8.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

A consensus may [fragment](#_Fragmentation_Principle)[^111] or
[consolidate](#consolidation-principle)[^112]. Generally a larger
consensus provides greater [utility](#Utility) and greater security by
more broadly [sharing risk](#risk-sharing-principle)[^113].

## Cryptodynamic Principles

Cryptodynamics is a term coined here for the purpose of easily referring
to the fundamental principles of [Bitcoin](#Bitcoin). This is intended
to both inform understanding of Bitcoin and differentiate it from other
technologies. The principles are the minimal subset of cryptoeconomic
principles necessary to achieve this objective.

While the choice of name is not too important, a rationale for it is
provided below.

Crypto[^114]

> "A crypto currency is a \[money\] that uses strong cryptography to
> secure financial transactions, control the creation of additional
> units, and verify the transfer of \[units\]."\
> \
> *Wikipedia*

Dynamics[^115]

> "Dynamics is the branch of applied mathematics \[\...\] concerned with
> the study of forces \[\...\] and their effect on motion."\
> \
> *Wikipedia*

Crypto + Dynamics

Cryptodynamics is the set of forces that secure Bitcoin
[transactions](#Transaction) by controlling (1)
[definition](#Consensus_Rules) of [units](#Unit), and (2)
[transfer](#Transfer) of units.

Principles

Security force is entirely human in nature. [People](#Person) must act
to secure anything, including Bitcoin. As an economic system, Bitcoin
security can only expect people to act in an economically-rational
manner (self-interest). As such Bitcoin security forces are entirely
based on the self-interested actions of individual persons,
specifically:

-   [Risk Sharing](#risk-sharing-principle)[^116]

-   [Energy Sinking](#proof-of-stake-fallacy)[^117]

-   [Power Regulating](\l)[^118]

These forces depend upon each other in order. Without risk sharing
energy cannot be sunk into the system to regulate the [power](#Power) of
a censor. With these three forces intact Bitcoin can be secure. Without
any one of them a technology is not Bitcoin.

It [cannot be assumed](#axiom-of-resistance)[^119] that, given the
incorporation of these forces, a Bitcoin implementation is securable.
Furthermore one may be more so than another. **It is only the case that
given the incorporation of these forces a technology is a Bitcoin and
that without them it is not.**

The possibility of security afforded by these forces can be referred to
as "cryptodynamic security". So, for example, a "permissioned
blockchain" violates the risk sharing principle, a strictly
[proof-of-stake](#Proof_Of_Stake) technology violates the energy sinking
principle, and a money entirely reliant on [subsidy](#Subsidy) for
[confirmation](#Confirmation) compensation violates the power regulating
principle. None of these are cryptodynamically secure.

## Custodial Risk Principle

When a contract represents an asset, the contract is a claim against the
asset's custodian. This claim is often called a security, with the
intended implication that the claim is "secured" against custodial
failure to [exchange](#Exchange) the asset under the terms of the
contract. The monetary [value](#Value) of the security is that of the
underlying asset minus the exchange and claim enforcement costs.

Custodial risk is a central aspect of any
[money](#collectible-tautology)[^120]. The usefulness of a money is
limited by the reliability of its custodian. Being [human](#Person), the
reliability of a custodian cannot be assured. In the case of
[state](#State) money, the single custodian is the state. As shown in
[Reservation Principle](#reservation-principle)[^121] state money exists
for the purpose of accumulating a [reserve](#_Toc59500667). This
provides a benefit to the state only because its custodial role can be
abrogated both through liquidation of the reserve and issuance of
fraudulent securities. In other words, custodial default is the reason
for state money.

The monetary value of a [unit](#Unit) of Bitcoin is strictly a function
of what it can acquire in [trade](#Trade). If no [merchant](#Merchant)
accepts it, a unit is not useful to its [owner](#Owner). Bitcoin is
non-custodial, but in the interest of establishing a general principle,
one may consider the set of all merchants the collective Bitcoin
custodian. As such the custodial risk is spread across the
[economy](#Economy).

In the case of Bitcoin, merchants offer their own property in
[exchange](#Exchange) for the money. As such there is no implied
securitization of the property. A merchant can cease to accept any
money, which reduces the [utility](#Utility) of the money. This can be
considered a custodial risk, but not a default as the merchant has
accepted no obligation to trade for the money. As shown in
[Fragmentation Principle](#_Fragmentation_Principle)[^122], changing
merchant acceptance is the nature of a split.

As shown in [Blockchain Fallacy](#blockchain-fallacy)[^123], "blockchain
technology" can offer no defense against custodial default. A
"tokenized" asset is a security. The opportunity for fraud or theft by
the custodian, either directly or as compelled by the state, is not
reduced. **Just as with commodity monies, such as gold, the custodial
risk reduction afforded by Bitcoin is not a consequence of technology or
contractual obligation, but the size of its economy.** Ironically it is
the "security" that is insecure.

## Hearn Error

There is a theory that a [state](#State) cannot ban popular things.

This implies that high [transaction](#Transaction) throughput allows
effective defense against [attacks](#Attack) and [coercion](#Coercion).
This in turn implies that [Bitcoin](#Bitcoin) can be secured by
accepting the [centralizing](#Centralization) force of very high
transaction throughput.

The theory is invalid, as it is based on empirical observation yet rests
on a factual error. **It is evident that states actually prefer to ban
popular things.** The following is a short list of commonly-banned
popular things:

-   Drugs

-   Gambling

-   Prostitution

-   Religion

-   Speech

-   Assembly

-   Trade

-   Migration

-   Weapons

-   Labor

-   Books

-   Money

This error may arise from failure to accept the [Axiom of
Resistance](#axiom-of-resistance)[^124] while continuing to work in
Bitcoin. This is likely to produce [cognitive
dissonance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cognitive_dissonance)[^125].
The subsequent search for relief may lead one here. However the error
eventually becomes undeniable, which may lead to a
[rage-quit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Rage_quit)[^126].

## Hoarding Fallacy

There is a theory that an increased level of [hoarding](#Hoard) produces
an increased level of security in a [coin](#Coin). This is the similar
to the [Dumping Fallacy](#dumping-fallacy)[^127] but is not necessarily
based on a [split](#Split).

The presumed security benefit to an elevated level of hoarding stems
from the theory that an [owner](#Owner) has a say in
[validation](#Validation) and could act to prevent the
[economy](#Economy) from accepting what the owners collectively consider
[invalid](#Validity) money. However owners are not acting unless they
[trade](#Trade) [units](#Unit) for something, and in this case, it is
the [merchant](#Merchant) who enforces [consensus
rules](#Consensus_Rules). **The possibility that owners could act in
unison does not increase this zero level of control. The theory is
therefore invalid.**

![](media/image10.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

An increase can only be described relative to some base level. If a
[person](#Person) can be convinced that there is increased system
security in a higher collective hoarding level, the theory holds that
the person may decide to hoard more than would otherwise be optimal
(i.e. the person's base level). This amounts to an actual individual
cost with a presumed socialized benefit. In other words the theory
depends on irrational economic behavior, even if the security benefit is
actual, and is therefore invalid.

The theory implies that less trade in the coin will produce greater
security. This is the opposite of the case. As shown in [Qualitative
Security Model](#qualitative-security-model)[^128], consensus rule
enforcement requires ongoing trade. The [price](#Price) of a unit of the
coin [in another good](#inflation-principle)[^129] or money is arbitrary
but rises temporarily if individuals are convinced to engage in the
fallacy. The benefit of this increase accrues to existing owners. The
theory that price can only rise is a related [speculative](#Speculate)
error explored in [Lunar Fallacy](#lunar-fallacy)[^130]. Even a provable
perpetual general price rise would not validate this theory, as it
relates only to a temporary relative increase caused by financially
sub-optimal individual decisions.

## Jurisdictional Arbitrage Fallacy

There is a theory that, since it is unlikely that all [states](#State)
would join a Bitcoin ban, the [coin](#Coin) would survive by movement of
[mining](#Mine) and other activity to permissive states.

Those who do not comply operate in the [black
market](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_market)[^131] from the
perspective of the banning authority. Another state in violation of a
ban is considered a [rogue
state](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rogue_state)[^132] from this
perspective. A ban is a simple political action against which Bitcoin
offers no protection.

There is a [related fallacy](#hearn-error)[^133] that such an action
would be impossibly difficult in the case where Bitcoin is popular. This
is the idea that Bitcoin is secured by the vote, which reduces its
security model to that of the status quo of state money, eliminating
Bitcoin's [value proposition](#value-proposition)[^134].

White market operations are by definition eliminated by a ban. The
theory therefore implies that Bitcoin is ultimately secured by the
protection of rogue states. This also reduces to security by vote.
Furthermore powerful states have many
[tools](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_embargoes)[^135]
to compel others, everything up to and including open warfare. These
tools are commonly employed in various wars, such as those on drugs,
money laundering and terror. A Bitcoin ban could easily fall under the
umbrella justifications for all of these existing international
conflicts.

However, Bitcoin is specifically designed to operate without permission
from any state. Its continued operation as a black market money may lead
one or more states to attempt its suppression [through
censorship](#other-means-principle)[^136]. While this may be attempted
by a single state, it is common for states to collaborate in defense of
the [taxing power](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^137] of
their monies. This is the purpose of the [International Monetary
Fund](https://www.imf.org)[^138].

Such an action can be executed [most
efficiently](#pooling-pressure-risk)[^139] from a single geographical
location. In this scenario rogue states offer no defense except to the
extent that they are not only willing to forego the tax benefit of their
own monies, but also to donate tax money to resist censorship. **It
cannot be assumed that rogue states can overpower the censoring
authority, and any dependence on them reduces Bitcoin to a
politically-secured money.** As such the theory is invalid.

## Other Means Principle

Bitcoin is an act of [resistance](#axiom-of-resistance)[^140], an
attempt to "gain a new territory of freedom." Freedom contracts through
the constant pressure of compulsory financing of the [state](#State). It
is typical that freedom is expanded through bloodshed, with the specific
objective of reducing state power. Bitcoin cannot eliminate the need for
personal risk in achieving this objective. However, through [risk
sharing](#risk-sharing-principle)[^141] it can potentially reduce the
inflation [tax](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^142] without
spilling blood. This will not eliminate tax generally; however it may
reduce state power by making tax significantly more visible.

This conflict between state and [individuals](#Person) for control of
[money](#collectible-tautology)[^143] will pass through up to four
phases anticipated by the Bitcoin [security
model](#qualitative-security-model)[^144]. These may overlap and vary
regionally but are each clearly identifiable.

1.  Honeymoon

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  Black Market

2.  Competition

3.  Surrender

![](media/image12.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

The honeymoon phase is characterized by a desire of state agencies to
retain regulatory control over the movement of money and securities. To
this end pressure is applied at points of [aggregation](#Aggregation).
As pressure on [pooled](#Political) [miners](#Miner) and
[centralized](#Centralization) [merchants](#Merchant) increases, cost
rises and utility drops. The money then necessarily becomes more
distributed to avoid these expenses.

As it becomes apparent that controls on points of aggregation are
insufficient enforcement, and the awareness surfaces that
[seigniorage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^145] is at
risk, [transaction](#Transaction) and complementary mining of Bitcoin is
[outlawed](#hearn-error)[^146]. As states collaborate to protect their
monies, this may become a global "War on Bitcoin". This may coincide
with adoption of an official new money, i.e.
[Fedcoin](#fedcoin-objectives)[^147]. The objective would be to appear
to embrace a "safer" money than Bitcoin while retaining the seigniorage
and surveillance advantages of electronic state money substitutes.

Assuming sufficient resistance, Bitcoin persists independent of Fedcoin
as a black market money. At this point the state concludes that the only
effective tactic is to compete as a miner. Given that mining is
[necessarily anonymous](#public-data-principle)[^148], there is [no
way](#proof-of-work-fallacy)[^149] for the [economy](#Economy) to
prevent state participation in mining. Thus Bitcoin enters the
[competitive phase](#other-means-principle)[^150], with the state
attempting a perpetual 51% [attack](#Attack).

Apart from ongoing black market phase enforcement, the competitive phase
is characterized by a peaceful [hash power](#Hash_Power) battle between
the state and individuals. The state operates at a [loss](#Loss) due to
the rejection of [censored](#Censorship) transactions. This loss is
offset by tax revenue. [Fee](#Fee) pressure on censored transactions
[rises](#censorship-resistance-property)[^151] until the state mining
tax subsidy is offset by this fee level. **At this point taxes and
censored transaction fees both rise until one side of the conflict
surrenders.**

In this manner Bitcoin can potentially win a [war by other
means](https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Carl_von_Clausewitz)[^152]. It
cannot be assumed that this surrender will be perpetual. As implied by
the [Threat Level Paradox](#threat-level-paradox)[^153], the money is
likely to drift into previous phases as the threat diminishes.

## Patent Resistance Principle

Unlike copyright, patent is an anti-market force. A true copyright is a
contractual agreement between buyer and seller, where patent is
exclusively a [state](#State) grant of
[monopoly](https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/1075)[^154].
The patent is not an "attack" by the patent-holder, it is a
[distortion](#Distortion) [pooling
pressure](#pooling-pressure-risk)[^155] created by the state.

The process of [mining](#Mine) is highly competitive. Monopoly
protection in the use of efficient mining
[algorithms](https://www.asicboost.com/patent)[^156] is a strong
anti-market pooling pressure. Bitcoin is secured by [people](#Person)
[resisting](#axiom-of-resistance)[^157] anti-market forces. Resistance
incurs greater [risk](#risk-sharing-principle)[^158] when the
[miner](#Miner) is highly [pooled](#Political) and/or
[non-anonymous](#public-data-principle)[^159].

If people do not resist such forces, there is no
[security](#qualitative-security-model)[^160] in the money. As the
[threat level](#threat-level-paradox)[^161] increases the consequence of
patent violation becomes no more of a risk than mining itself. **As such
the impact of patents is inconsequential as it pertains to the security
of the money.**

## Permissionless Principle

Bitcoin is [designed](#cryptodynamic-principles)[^162] to operate
without permission from any authority. Its [value
proposition](#value-proposition)[^163] is entirely based on this
property.

A [market](#Market) can be divided into permissioned and permissionless
from the perspective of the [state](#State). For ease of reference the
former is often referred to as "white market" and the latter "black
market". White market [trade](#Trade), by definition, requires
permission, and black market does not.

As a simple matter of definition, **Bitcoin operations cannot be both
white market and permissionless.** Any [person](#Person) operating in
the white market requires permission to do so. Bitcoin is therefore
inherently a black market money. Its security architecture necessarily
assumes it is operating without [state
permission](#other-means-principle)[^164].

The security of Bitcoin does not extend to white market systems. Any
system dependent upon the value proposition of Bitcoin must also be
black market.

## Prisoner's Dilemma Fallacy

There is a theory that in a choice to join a ban on Bitcoin, individual
states face a [prisoner's
dilemma](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prisoner%27s_dilemma)[^165]. A
meaningful ban implies one or more states (the "prison") will enforce
[economic
sanctions](https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/what-are-economic-sanctions)[^166]
(at least) on other states (the "prisoners") potentially moving to
Bitcoin as a [reserve
currency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reserve_currency)[^167].

We assume that the prisoners who may decide to use Bitcoin are
[trading](#Trade) partners. In other words its use as a reserve currency
requires a partner with whom to [transact](#Transaction).

[Ordinal utility](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ordinal_utility)[^168]
is implied by [subjective
value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value)[^169].
No outcome [ties](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tie_(draw))[^170] are
observed, implying strong dilemma. Both symmetric and asymmetric
knowledge assumptions are evaluated.

The outcome for individual Bitcoin (Sucker) :

-   Economic sanction.

-   No trading partners (using Dollar).

-   An unusable reserve currency (no trading partners).

The outcome for mutual Bitcoin (Reward) :

-   Economic sanction.

-   Economic sanction of trading partner.

-   A reserve currency not taxed via seigniorage.

The outcome for individual Dollar (Temptation) :

-   No economic sanction.

-   Economic sanction of trading partner.

-   A reserve currency taxed via seigniorage.

The outcome for mutual Dollar (Punishment) :

-   No economic sanction.

-   No economic sanction of trading partner.

-   A reserve currency taxed via seigniorage.

Strong Symmetric Dilemma With Ordinal Outcome Relations

  Brazil\\Ireland   Bitcoin   Dollar
  ----------------- --------- --------
  Bitcoin           R\\R      S\\T
  Dollar            T\\S      P\\P

To be considered a prisoner's dilemma T \> R \> P \> S must be true
where:

-   T \> R and P \> S imply that Dollar is the dominant strategy for
    each.

-   R \> P implies that mutual Bitcoin is preferred by each to mutual
    Dollar.

We can conclude that P \> S holds, as individual sanction implies no
international settlement and therefore no benefit from a [foreign
exchange
reserve](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign-exchange_reserves)[^171],
and presumably sanctions are undesirable.

To determine if R \> P and T \> R hold, an objective method is required
to relate only seigniorage and sanction, as presumably sanctions are
undesirable. This can be obtained by the observation that Gold is
subject to neither
[seigniorage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^172] nor
sanction. In other words Gold provides the above benefits of Bitcoin
without sanction. Yet Gold has not been chosen (and was previously
dropped in favor of Dollar), which implies the Dollar outcome is
preferred to Gold and therefore Bitcoin. As such, neither of the
[dominant
strategies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strategic_dominance)[^173]
hold. **As such there is no dilemma.**

Strong Asymmetric Dilemma With Ordinal Outcome Relations

  Brazil\\Ireland   Bitcoin   Dollar
  ----------------- --------- --------
  Bitcoin           Rr\\Rc    Sr\\Tc
  Dollar            Tr\\Sc    Pr\\Pc

To be considered a prisoner's dilemma Ti \> Ri \> Pi \> Si must be true
where:

-   Tr \> Rr and Pr \> Sr

-   Tc \> Rc and Pc \> Sc

-   Rr \> Pr and Rc \> Pc

If these relations all hold then individual Dollar is preferred to
Bitcoin, and mutual Bitcoin is preferred. Given that these are the same
relations evaluated in the symmetric scenario, there is no dilemma.

Other Assumptions

The Gold-Bitcoin relation assumes that
[clearing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clearing_(finance))[^174]
costs, of transporting Gold and [confirming](#Confirmation) Bitcoin, are
[negligible](https://www.gold.org/about-gold/history-of-gold/the-gold-standard)[^175]
in the context of international settlement. Clearing requires periodic
movement of only payment imbalances between states.

> \... any correction of an economic imbalance would be accelerated and
> normally it would not be necessary to wait for the point at which
> substantial quantities of gold needed to be transported from one
> country to another.\
> \
> *gold.org*

Dollar has been preferred to Gold despite having similar weight,
significantly larger size, and seigniorage. The Gold-Bitcoin relation
assumes no distinction in volatility and liquidity, though Gold
objectively
[outperforms](https://coinweek.com/bullion-report/bitcoin-vs-gold-10-crystal-clear-comparisons)[^176]
Bitcoin in both areas. Given that Gold and Bitcoin are both [stable
monies](#_Stability_Property)[^177], no speculative return is assumed
for either. Other Gold, Bitcoin and Dollar monetary properties are
assumed to be either equivalent or not relevant to state reserve
currency.

## Private Key Fallacy

Private keys do not secure Bitcoin, they secure [units](#Unit) of
Bitcoin. **Private key control applies to individual security, not
system security.** Whoever controls keys is the [owner](#Owner), and
Bitcoin provides security for that owner, even if the keys are stolen.
Decentralized [validation](#Validation) secures [consensus](#Consensus)
and distributed [majority hash power](#Majority_Hash_Power) secures
[confirmation](#Confirmation), but private key security is the owner's
problem.

## Proof of Work Fallacy

[Merchants](\l) purchase [mining](#Mine) services that meet their
[rules](#Rule) for a satisfactory [fee](#Fee). There is a theory that
mining services are subservient in this [trade](#Trade). This
subservience is sometimes described as "asymmetry" or "users rule". This
theory leads people to believe that mining can be strongly
[pooled](#Political) as long as merchants are not
[centralized](#Centralization), as the [economy](#Economy) can control
the behavior of mining, rendering the system secure. The consequence of
this invalid theory is complacency regarding the insecurity caused by
pooling.

[Miners](#Miner) control [transaction](#Transaction) selection, while
merchants control property offered in [exchange](#Exchange). If some
part of the economy is unsatisfied with the selections of miners, it can
offer its property for sale in a [split](#Split) [coin](#Coin) with a
different [work](#Work) [rule](#Rule) that obsoletes all
[grinding](#Grinder) hardware. This is typically described as a
[proof-of-work](#Proof_Of_Work) [hard fork](#Hard_Fork)*.*

According to this theory miners then suffer a catastrophic loss due to
the unrecoverable capital investment in highly-specialized hardware. The
hard fork may include a [difficulty](#Difficulty)
[adjustment](#Adjustment), allowing [confirmation](#Confirmation) to
continue despite a presumed significant drop in [hash rate](#Hash_Rate).
Due to the lower difficulty and a presumed lack of specialized hardware,
more individuals are able to mine. This introduces new miners to the
business and reduces pooling.

It has been said that this ability of the economy to foist a capital
loss on its trading partners is an asymmetry unique in comparison to
other [markets](#Market). For example, an apple buying community cannot
simply "destroy" the orchards of all of its suppliers. **The theory
fails to recognize that there is no asymmetry in trade.** If all apple
buyers decide that they will buy no apples from existing orchards they
certainly have that power.

Similarly, the orchards have the option to not sell. [Price](#Price) is
the continual resolution of this tension. This is exactly the same
dynamic that exists in every market.

![](media/image14.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

**The theory also fails to account for lack of identity.** It assumes
that the capital loss will cause the exit of existing "bad" miners and
the entry of new "good" miners. This is an unsupportable assumption.
There is no reason to believe that existing miners will exit nor is
there any reason to believe that new miners would not make the same
decisions as previous miners given that they are in the same business,
assuming one could even tell the difference. At least in the apple
scenario one knows from whom one is buying apples and can discriminate,
this is not possible in Bitcoin.

**The theory also fails to account for the economics of mining.** There
is an [advantage to proximity](#proximity-premium-flaw)[^178] that
produces greater returns on capital for miners with greater hash power.
Larger miners are therefore more profitable than small miners. Larger
miners will therefore be better capitalized than their smaller
competition. When the rule change occurs the miners that remain will be
those who can afford to retool, which will be the largest.

It is irrational to assume that all miners will simply exit. Would we
expect all apple growers to be replaced by new apple growers? In mining
are not expertise, facilities, energy contracts, process, and
non-specialized [machinery](#Machine) important advantages over
newcomers? Existing miners have an inherent advantage over their
supposed replacements. This means they have greater access to capital.
So not only do larger miners end up with less competition, all existing
miners that remain have an advantage over any new miners.

**The theory also fails to consider that merchants need mining.** Mining
is not replaced by splitting, and it retains complete control over
transaction selection. So for example if the "bad" miners happen to be
[states](#State) that are [attacking](#Attack) the coin, the state
itself and [co-opted](#Co_option) miners will continue with the same
disruption, at a lower energy cost. As other miners fail due to what is
effectively a 100% tax, the attacker's energy cost continues to
decrease. Mining services that are "good" for merchants cannot be
produced by splitting.

**Finally, the theory fails to recognize insurance consequences.** Based
on the previous capital loss experienced by all miners for a given coin,
all future miners of its replacement will insure against the likelihood
of a similar event. They may self-insure, but the increased cost is
unavoidable. This will reduce hash rate for the same fee until the
possibility of such an event is deemed negligible. So the economy
reduces its own double-spend security and ends up with the same miners
and greater pooling. This is a reduction of security on two levels, with
no benefit.

## Public Data Principle

It follows from the [Risk Sharing
Principle](#risk-sharing-principle)[^179] that system security depends
upon covert [mining](#Mine) and [trade](#Trade). A [coin](#Coin) exists
as a [mutually-beneficial](#balance-of-power-fallacy)[^180]
[market](#Market) between [miners](#Miner) and [merchants](#Merchant)
for the [confirmation](#Confirmation) of [transactions](#Transaction)
within [blocks](#Block) in [exchange](#Exchange) for [fees](#Fee).

The necessarily covert activities are listed by role:

Miner

-   obtain blocks \[to build upon\]

-   obtain unconfirmed transactions \[to earn fees from\]

-   create and distribute blocks \[to cause others to build upon\]

-   receive payment for confirmations \[to finance operations\]

Merchant

-   obtain blocks \[to validate customer payment\]

-   obtain unconfirmed transactions (optional) \[to anticipate payments
    and fees\]

-   create and distribute transactions \[to obtain customer payment\]

-   make payment for confirmations \[to compensate confirmation\]

If blocks cannot be obtained anonymously the system is insecure. The
inability to obtain the [strongest](#Strong) blocks available to other
[people](#Person) is a network [partition](#Partition), which implies
localized insecurity. However neither anonymity, nor its opposite
[identity](#Identity), can ensure one sees the strongest
[branch](#Branch) at any given time. In other words, any attempt to
mitigate partitioning with the introduction of identity is a [false
choice](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/False_dilemma)[^181] that
sacrifices system security for the false promise of ensuring localized
security.

![](media/image16.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

It is not essential that all miners or merchants see all transactions at
any given time. However broad visibility is preferable as it produces
the most robust competition for fees and best leading information. In

other words, a market where every participant sees all of the
transactions all of the time is a [perfect
market](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perfect_competition)[^182]. Asking
the network for specific transactions, as opposed to all (or summary
information about all), is a source of taint and must be avoided in the
interest of security as well.

Creation of blocks and transactions does not inherently expose identity,
however public distribution of either is the primary source of
[taint](#Taint). To the extent that miners openly self-identify, they
are relying on the assumption of a [low-threat
environment](#threat-level-paradox)[^183], not contributing to system
security. Avoiding taint when disseminating blocks and transactions
requires use of an anonymous
[connection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anonymizer)[^184] to a
community [server](#Node). This ensures the distribution network never
has access to identifying information.

![](media/image18.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

[Proof-of-work](\l) preserves the anonymity of miners. There is no
signature associated with mining and energy is presumed to be
ubiquitous. Similarly, the ability to pay anonymously for confirmation
is the reason for transaction fee inclusion. It is
[sufficient](#side-fee-fallacy)[^185] to pay a miner directly (off
[chain](#Chain)) for confirmation, however this exposes the merchant and
miner to each other, and makes it more difficult to estimate fees
anonymously.

Bitcoin is novel in that all financial transactions can be
[validated](#Validation) from public data and without identity.
Centralized financial systems rely on either trust in
(cryptographically-identifiable) connections to other parties or trust
in (cryptographically-verifiable) signatures on transmitted data. This
is the essence of trust-based systems; certain authorities have secrets
that others use to verify that authenticity. **The reason for validation
is to eliminate the use of identity and thereby authority.**

## Qualitative Security Model

Decentralization Model

In [Social Network Principle](#risk-sharing-principle)[^186] it is shown
that Bitcoin is a network of [human](#Person) relationships. This can be
modelled as a [directed
graph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graph_(discrete_mathematics)#Directed_graph)[^187]
where each vertex represents a [merchant](#Merchant) and each edge
represents a [trade](#Trade) for bitcoin. Edges indicate the direction
of movement of [coin](#Coin) and are quantified in the number of
[units](#Unit) traded. All [owners](#Person) are presumed to have been
merchants at the time of coin receipt, including as [miners](#Miner)
(selling [confirmations](#Confirmation)) and as recipients of charity
([selling
goodwill](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goodwill_(accounting))[^188]).

If a person is not personally accepting coin, or does not personally
[validate](#Validation) coin accepted, the person cannot reject invalid
coin. The person is entrusting this task to a central authority. **All
people utilizing the same delegate are reduced to just one vertex that
represents the delegate.**

For any period of time, [economic](#Economy) security is a function of
the number of merchants and the similarity of amounts traded. The
strongest economy would be all people in the world trading for the same
number of units in the period, an ideal which can be called a
"distributed" (or fully-decentralized) economy. The weakest would be one
delegate accepting all units traded in the period, which would be a
"centralized" economy.

More specifically, the system is most economically decentralized which
has the greatest number of vertices (merchants) with the lowest
coefficient of
[variation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coefficient_of_variation)[^189]
in the incoming edges (receipts). Defining a distribution function as
the inverse of coefficient of variation we obtain:

> economic-decentralization = distribution(receipts) \* merchants

Similar to economic security, confirmation security can be modelled as
an edgeless [graph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Null_graph)[^190].
Each [miner](#Miner) is represented by one vertex on the graph. A
[grinder](#Grinder) is not a miner as the grinder has no decision-making
ability, only the miner is represented. The total [hash
power](#Hash_Power) employed by a miner is the weight of the vertex.

For any period of time, confirmation security is a function of the
number of miners and the similarity of hash power they directed. The
strongest censorship resistance would be all people in the world mining
at the same hash power in the period, an ideal which can be called
"distributed" (or fully-decentralized) confirmation. The weakest would
be one miner with 100% of hash power, which would be "centralized"
confirmation.

More specifically, the system is most decentralized in confirmation
which has the greatest number of vertices (miners) with the highest
distribution in weights (hash power):

> confirmation-decentralization = distribution(hash-power) \* miners

Security Model

[Decentralization](#Decentralization) alone is not security. Security is
the product of activity, distribution of that activity, and the fraction
of participating humanity.

> security = activity \* distribution \* participation

Given that there is no limit to humanity, trade or computation, the
level of security in each axis is unbounded. Security is also unbounded
with perfect distribution (i.e. infinite decentralization). A minimum
level of zero in each is achieved with either no participation or no
activity. Economic and confirmation security can thus be defined as:

> economic-security = receipts \* distribution(receipts) \* \[merchants
> / humanity\]\
> \
> confirmation-security = hash-power \* distribution(hash-power) \*
> \[miners / humanity\]

Limits of the Model

These relations do not say anything about the absolute effectiveness
represented by any value, or the relative effectiveness of any two
values except that a greater value represents a greater effectiveness.
This is not due to a deficiency in the model. The factors include
people, specifically the effectiveness of their individual abilities to
[resist](#axiom-of-resistance)[^191] and their perception of
[value](#Value) in the money. All who validate or mine offer some level
of resistance, but there is no implied continuity. We refer to a "level"
of security, not an "amount" of security.

As show in [Public Data Principle](#public-data-principle)[^192],
anonymity is a tool that aids in defending one's ability to trade and/or
mine. As such the level of decentralization can never be measured; the
model is a conceptual aid. As shown in [Balance of Power
Fallacy](#balance-of-power-fallacy)[^193], the security afforded by each
of the two sub-models is complementary and independent of the other.
While people could decide to trade and/or mine independently in the
future, the [Cockroach Fallacy](#cockroach-fallacy)[^194] shows that
they are not contributing to security until they do so. The model
represents security as it exists in the period.

## Risk Sharing Principle

Bitcoin is not secured by
[blockchains](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blockchain)[^195], [hash
power](#Hash_Power), [validation](#Validation),
[decentralization](#Centralization),
[cryptography](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptography)[^196], [open
source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_and_open-source_software)[^197]
or [game theory](#prisoners-dilemma-fallacy)[^198] -- it is secured by
[people](#Person).

**Technology is never the root of system security.** Technology is a
tool to help people secure what they value. Security requires people to
act. A server cannot be secured by a firewall if there is no lock on the
door to the server room, and a lock cannot secure the server room
without a guard to monitor the door, and a guard cannot secure the door
without risk of personal harm.

![](media/image20.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

Bitcoin is no different, it is secured by people who place themselves at
personal risk. Sharing this risk with other people is the purpose of
[decentralization](#Decentralization). A [centralized
system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liberty_Reserve)[^199] requires
one [person](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ross_Ulbricht)[^200] to
shoulder all of its risk. A decentralized system divides risk [among
individuals](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BitTorrent)[^201] who
comprise system security. Those who do not understand the value of
decentralization most likely do not understand the [necessary
role](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/09/big-in-venezuela/534177)[^202]
of people in security.

Bitcoin allows people to share the personal risk of accepting and mining
coin. It is only the willingness and ability of these people to
[resist](#axiom-of-resistance)[^203] that can prevent
[coercion](#Coercion) of their [nodes](#Node) and
[co-option](#Co_option) of their [mines](#Mine), and this is what
actually secures Bitcoin. If people do not accept these risks, there is
no effective security in the money. If a great many people do so
individual risk is minimized. Bitcoin is a tool, not magic.

## Social Network Principle

In the terminology of [Paul Baran's 1964 paper on distributed
networks](http://web.cs.ucla.edu/classes/cs217/Baran64.pdf)[^204]Â the
importance of topology in network design is the ability of
communicationsÂ to withstand the loss ofÂ a certain number ofÂ nodes. A
centralized (star)Â networkÂ will fail with the loss of one node. A
distributed (mesh) network is moreÂ resilient. A hybrid of these systems
isÂ considered decentralized.

![](media/image22.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

As a money Bitcoin forms a social graph. Only a [person](#Person) can
decide to accept one [money](#collectible-tautology)[^205] or another in
[trade](#Trade). A set of people sharing the same
[definition](#Consensus_Rules) for a money is referred to as a
[consensus](#Consensus). Authority in aÂ monetary system is the
[power](#Power) to define the money. Bitcoin is a tool that people can
use to defend against the tendency towardÂ authority, in order to
preserve their agreement and therefore [utility](#Utility) in the money.

**In distributed systems terminology a Bitcoin "node" is a person and
the system is money.** It does not matter how many [machines](#Machine)
the person controls, the loss of that person is a loss of a node in the
system (including all of the person's machines).

A centralized money cannot withstand the loss of one person. If that one
person changes their rules, the original money ceases to exist. As shown
in [Risk Sharing Principle](#risk-sharing-principle)[^206], Bitcoin
relies on [decentralization](#Decentralization) to allow people to
[resist](#axiom-of-resistance)[^207] authority. This decentralization
makes the money more able to withstand the loss of more people when
faced with [state](#State) attacks. A loss in this sense is the refusal
of the person to trade in the money.

## Threat Level Paradox

As implied by the [Zero Sum Property](#zero-sum-property)[^208],
presumably the only way to defeat [external
subsidy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subsidy)[^209] is to
[mine](#Mine) at a capital loss relative to [market](#Market) return on
capital. Similarly it seems that only way to defeat tax, up to and
including a 100% tax (prohibition), is to mine beyond the reach of the
taxing authority, such as in secret. As with all [black
markets](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_market)[^210] there is an
increased cost to [subversive
mining](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/09/big-in-venezuela/534177)[^211].
Competing against subsidized mining compounds the cost.

If one accepts the [Axiom of Resistance](#axiom-of-resistance)[^212] one
must assume that both tax and subsidy will be used to reduce the cost of
controlling Bitcoin. Using the power to subsidize mining (via tax
revenues), [states](#State) can cause [pooling](#Political) in the
region of the subsidy. Once [majority hash power](#Majority_Hash_Power)
is focused the state can use its taxing (regulatory) power in the region
to compel [censorship](#Censorship).

Therefore in order to enjoy the benefits of a Bitcoin, it would seem
that [people](#Person) will ultimately have to mine at a loss. However,
censorship creates the opportunity for others to mine profitably to the
extent that people are willing to offset this cost with [fees](#Fee).
This black market is Bitcoin's censorship resistance.

![](media/image24.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

People pay a higher price for certain transactions, and in order to
maintain that higher price the state must also suffer the expense,
despite its ineffectiveness.

**Paradoxically, this tool works well when money is under attack and
poorly otherwise.** If there was no *internal*
[pooling-pressure](#pooling-pressure-risk)[^213] these cases would be
balanced. But [risk distribution](#risk-sharing-principle)[^214] is
essential to subversive mining, and pooling pressure works *against*
distribution. So there is ever-expanding [attack
surface](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Attack_surface)[^215] with no
pressure to contract unless effective monetary alternatives are
suppressed. The
[suppression](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_exchange_controls)[^216]
of alternatives raises [reward](#Reward) [utility](#Utility) to the
miner in the region of suppression. The paradox applies as well to
[centralization pressures](#centralization-risk)[^217].

The expected consequence is that Bitcoin will not be well prepared for
[attacks](#Attack) because it is financially disadvantageous for
[people](#Person) in a low threat environment.

## Value Proposition

The [value](#Value) of Bitcoin over its alternatives derives directly
from removing the [state](#State) from control over both monetary
[supply](#Supply) and [transaction](#Transaction)
[censorship](#Censorship). Advantages include freedom from
[seigniorage](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^218],
foreign exchange
[controls](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_exchange_controls)[^219],
and [financial
surveillance](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Know_your_customer)[^220].
These allow the money to be [transferred](#Transfer) to any
[person](#Person), in any place, at any time, without need for third
party permission.

![](media/image26.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

These advantages represent cost reduction through the avoidance of tax.
Seigniorage is directly a tax, while foreign exchange controls limit its
evasion. The state itself often claims [political
independence](https://www.federalreserve.gov/faqs/about_12799.htm)[^221]
as an objective in the interest of limiting this taxing power. Financial
surveillance limits tax evasion more generally. **While Bitcoin cannot
eliminate tax, or even necessarily reduce total takings, it represents a
change in the nature of taxation.** In any case, for those who consider
the state a social good, the option to voluntarily fund it remains.

It would be an error to assume these advantages flow from the existence
of a more efficient technology than employed by [monopoly
monies](#collectible-tautology)[^222]. The technology is far [less
efficient](#scalability-principle)[^223], yet it [helps
people](#risk-sharing-principle)[^224] resist state controls. It is this
[resistance](#axiom-of-resistance)[^225] that provides the value.

# Statism

## Fedcoin Objectives

As implied by [Value Proposition](#value-proposition)[^226] there are
two aspects of Bitcoin that make it a target of [state](#State)
controls, both threats to tax revenue.

In [combating](#other-means-principle)[^227] [Bitcoin](#Bitcoin) the
state may attempt to introduce a cosmetically similar
[money](#collectible-tautology)[^228], which can be referred to as
Fedcoin. This could be introduced as a [split](#Split) or alternative
[coin](#Coin). The objective would be to preserve the superficial
aspects of Bitcoin while eliminating its value proposition. This would
protect tax revenues while allowing proponents to propagandize Fedcoin
as a "safer" alternative to Bitcoin. Fedcoin is not itself relevant to
Bitcoin except to the extent that the act of compelling its use requires
[resistance](#axiom-of-resistance)[^229].

The essential Fedcoin distinctions from Bitcoin allow the state to
arbitrarily create new [units](#Unit)
([seigniorage](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^230]) and
deny [transfer](#Transfer) ([censorship](#Censorship)). The seigniorage
objective can be achieved by a [hard fork](#Hard_Fork) that introduces
one new [consensus rule](#Consensus_Rules). This rule allows the
introduction of new units in the case where the state has signed an
inflationary [transaction](#Transaction). The censorship objective can
be achieved by a [soft fork](#Soft_Fork) that precludes
[confirmation](#Confirmation) of transactions that lack state signature.

**Preventing the state from compelling the use of these forks is the
central purpose of Bitcoin system security.** The [economy](#Economy)
guards against the hard fork and [miners](#Miner) guard against the soft
fork. The [risks](#risk-sharing-principle)[^231] taken by these
[people](#Person) preserve the [value](#Value) of the money relative to
state-controlled alternatives.

## Inflationary Quality Fallacy

There is a theory that the [price
inflation](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflation)[^232] caused by
[seigniorage](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^233] causes
the production of lower "quality" and/or less
[durable](#depreciation-principle)[^234] goods. Durability is one of
many qualities that a [person](#Person) might [value](#Value) in one
good over another**. The theory necessarily presumes that value is
objective and therefore contradicts the subjective theory of value.** As
such the theory is invalid.

There is no provable relation between the number of [units](#Unit) of
[money](#collectible-tautology)[^235] required to trade for a good and
the qualities of a good that one might prefer. Greater wealth (which is
perception, as value is
[subjective](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value)[^236]),
implies lower [time preference](#time-preference-fallacy)[^237], as
implied by the theory of marginal
[utility](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marginal_utility)[^238].
However even under the assumption of a misperception of increasing
wealth, lower time preference does not imply a preference for lower
"quality" goods. It implies only an increasing willingness to
[lend](#Lend) a greater portion of one's capital.
[Rothbard](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Murray_Rothbard)[^239] makes
this "subtle" error in [*What Has Government Done to Our
Money*](https://mises.org/library/what-has-government-done-our-money/html/p/81)[^240],
one that continues to be perpetuated.

> The quality of work will decline in an inflation for a more subtle
> reason: people become enamored of "get-rich-quick" schemes, seemingly
> within their grasp in an era of ever-rising prices, and often scorn
> sober effort.\
> \
> *Murray Rothbard: What has Government Done to Our Money*

It is assumed, certainly by Rothbard, that people *always* prefer to get
rich sooner than later, as implied by the axiom of time preference. And
as shown by the [Fisher
Hypothesis](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fisher_hypothesis)[^241], to
the extent that price inflation is predictable it is offset in the [real
interest
rate](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real_interest_rate)[^242]. To the
extent it is not predictable Rothbard's conjecture does not apply.

Seigniorage is a tax, which makes people poorer. Being poorer
*increases* time preference, the opposite effect described by the
theory. All tax shifts property involuntarily from some people to other
people, as that is its only actual mechanism and objective respectively.
As Rothbard himself elaborates in his significantly more rigorous [*Man
Economy and
State*](https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/ppp/1393)[^243],
the form of the tax is economically irrelevant.

> For all these reasons, the goal of uniformity of taxation is an
> impossible one. It is not simply difficult to achieve in practice; it
> is conceptually impossible and self-contradictory.\
> \
> *Murray Rothbard: Man Economy and State*

Therefore it cannot even be shown that seigniorage itself makes those
taxed poorer than the taxes it presumably replaces. Only a net increase
in tax implies a reduction in wealth.

## Reservation Principle

The term "[reserve](#reserve-definition)"[^244] refers to a hoard of
capital, as distinct from that portion of savings which is
[invested](#Lend). Both [states](#State) and [people](#Person) hoard
capital to satisfy expected liquidity requirements. The term "[reserve
currency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reserve_currency)"[^245] refers
to a state hoard, as required for
[settlement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Settlement_(finance))[^246]
of accounts with other states. Money reserves of people within a state
generally consist of the state's issued money -- primarily notes or
fiat, with a lesser amount in
[coin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commodity_money)[^247].

States buy reserve currency from people using [monopoly
money](#collectible-tautology)[^248], foreign exchange
[controls](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_exchange_controls)[^249]
and direct taxation. Using their own money discounts purchases by the
amount of
[seigniorage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^250]. Foreign
exchange controls restrict or prohibit use of the reserve currency as
money. By treating the reserve currency as property but not money, the
state creates a tax on the apparent capital
[gain](https://www.investopedia.com/articles/personal-finance/081616/understanding-taxes-physical-goldsilver-investments.asp)[^251]
in the reserve money when it [devalues its
money](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflation)[^252] against the
reserve money through [monetary
inflation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation)[^253].
Official [exchange
rates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exchange_rate#Parallel_exchange_rate)[^254]
below market value create another tax on use of the reserve currency.

A "gold standard" is one in which the state collects gold as a foreign
exchange reserve, and individuals reserve in claims to a "standard"
amount. The U.S. Dollar was
[established](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coinage_Act_of_1834)[^255]
as redeemable in gold at \$20.67 per ounce in 1834. For 100 years the
state bought and sold gold at this rate. In 1934 the Dollar was
[devalued](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_Reserve_Act)[^256] by 60%,
to \$35 per ounce. At this point its redeemability (by people) was
abrogated, and it was made unlawful for them to hoard or contract in it.
This irredeemably was
[extended](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nixon_shock)[^257] to other
states in 1971, officially ending the gold standard in the United
States. No longer a debt of the state, the Dollar transitioned from a
[representative
currency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representative_money)[^258]
(i.e. note) to fiat.

![](media/image28.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

The U.S. primary foreign exchange reserve [is
gold](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_reserve)[^259] (74.5%) with the
remainder in foreign currency and equivalents, whereas citizens
primarily reserve using the Dollar. A state's own notes or fiat are not
generally usable as its own foreign exchange reserve, as the state can
abrogate or devalue its payment.

The U.S. Treasury reports that it
[hoards](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/IR-Position/Pages/01042019.aspx)[^260]
over 8,000 metric tons of gold, worth approximately \$400,000,000,000.
The purchasing power of the U.S. Dollar note in 1834 was about 30 times
that of U.S. Dollar fiat in 2019.

**The purpose of a reserve currency is to tax.** The state first buys
the reserve money with negotiable promissory
[notes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Promissory_note)[^261], then
issues more notes than it has money in reserve, then abrogates the notes
and retains the reserve. The devaluation of the notes is the result of
excess issuance (seigniorage) and is a tax on those who hoard them. The
state collects the reserve money into its hoard, which represents its
ability to settle its own debts with other states. While people do still
hoard the reserve money, it is subject to onerous
[constraints](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-venezuela-economy/venezuela-loosens-currency-exchange-controls-to-allow-forex-trading-idUSKCN1SD2NC)[^262]
on its use in order to preserve the tax benefit of the state's monopoly
money. These constraints tighten as the level of the tax rises.

The use of gold as a state reserve offers no monetary benefit to
individuals who must still trade in monopoly money. As shown in [Reserve
Currency Fallacy](#reserve-currency-fallacy)[^263], Bitcoin as a state
reserve can do no better. However, unlike gold, Bitcoin's definition is
in the hands of those who accept it in trade. With the bulk of actual
bitcoin acceptance in the hands of the state, with people trading in
money
[substitutes](https://wiki.mises.org/wiki/Money_substitutes)[^264],
there is nothing to restrain the state from introducing both arbitrary
[inflation](#Inflation) and [censorship](#Censorship).

## Reserve Currency Fallacy

There is a theory that [Bitcoin](#Bitcoin) will eventually be held by
[states](#State) as a [reserve currency](#reservation-principle)[^265]
and that individuals will transact using [monopoly
money](#collectible-tautology)[^266] "backed" by Bitcoin. The theory
asserts that [transaction](#Transaction) volume is insufficient for its
use as a consumer currency, but the ability to prevent [monetary
inflation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation)[^267] makes
Bitcoin an ideal reserve asset. Central banks and their authorized
functionaries would issue negotiable [promissory
notes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Promissory_note)[^268] while
holding Bitcoin in reserve. Given that Bitcoin cannot be inflated, the
litany of problems produced by state control of money would be resolved,
ushering in a new era of prosperity. Transaction [fees](#Fee) would be
low while transaction volume would be limitless.

Let us consider the scenario as it unfolds. Bitcoin becomes a fairly
widely utilized [currency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Currency)[^269]
but struggles with low transaction volume, high fees and long
[confirmation](#Confirmation) times. In order to obtain a reserve of
bitcoin (BTC) the state issues
[negotiable](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Negotiable_instrument)[^270]
Bitcoin Certificates (BC) in [exchange](#Exchange) for bitcoin. This may
be accomplished by seizing centralized accounts (compelling conversion)
or by market trading, both of which have been done to build gold
reserves. An auditing process is set up whereby [people](#Person) can
verify that the issued BC never exceeds BTC reserves. [Legal tender
laws](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Legal_tender)[^271] are created,
requiring people to accept BC as payment for settlement of debts unless
otherwise explicitly agreed. People purchase BC with BTC so that they
can pay taxes and buy stuff from white [market](#Market) retailers.
Eventually most BTC is held as state reserves.

**This scenario should sound familiar, as it is how states ended up with
gold and people ended up with paper.** The theory is invalid on multiple
levels.

The ratio of issued BC to BTC in reserve cannot ever be effectively
audited. Even if Bitcoin [consensus rules](#Consensus_Rules) somehow
remain, there is *no way* to know how much BC has been issued, and there
is no recourse if debasement is suspected. The central bank must be
*trusted* to account for BC issuance, and ultimately this means everyone
trusts the state to not engage in
[easing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantitative_easing)[^272].
History demonstrates that this is unlikely, and nevertheless it is no
improvement over current state monies.

So why is it that a person cannot ever effectively audit (validate) BC,
as is possible with the BTC that it replaced? Because that would make BC
indistinguishable from the BTC held in reserve. In other words the
*reason* there is a difference between legal tender and reserve currency
is to enable inflation of the currency in use
([taxation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^273]) while
holding a better
[money](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gresham%27s_law)[^274] in reserve
(hoard).

Furthermore, for Bitcoin to exist there must be an actual
[decentralized](#Decentralization) Bitcoin [economy](#Economy). Without
individuals [validating](#Validation) BTC received in [trade](#Trade),
there is nobody to refuse [invalid](#Validity) BTC as it comes to be
redefined by the [state](#fedcoin-objectives)[^275]. In this case
[censorship](#censorship-resistance-property)[^276] and inflation can
easily be introduced, invalidating the theory. Only black market Bitcoin
transaction and mining can [resist](#axiom-of-resistance)[^277] this
transition. This provides little economic pressure on the state to
maintain consistency with Bitcoin consensus rules.

[Layering](#Layering) preserves the [cryptodynamic
principles](#cryptodynamic-principles)[^278] of
[decentralization](#Decentralization), while "backing" is full
abandonment of them. Bitcoin cannot be sustained as predominantly a
backing money for central bank notes. People must trade with it for it
to be secure.

It is certainly possible for Bitcoin to be held by state treasuries, but
this offers no transaction scaling or other advantage to people.

## State Banking Principle

There is no actual [lender of last
resort](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lender_of_last_resort)[^279] in
[free banking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_banking)[^280], it
implies just another [lender](#Lend) subject to the constraints
demonstrated in [Thin Air Fallacy](#thin-air-fallacy)[^281]. However, in
[state](#State) banking this is the [central
bank](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_bank)[^282], supported by
the taxpayer. The state taxes to provide [discount
loans](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discount_window)[^283] to [member
banks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Structure_of_the_Federal_Reserve_System)[^284]
and the state treasury. The loans must be at a discount to [market
rates](https://www.frbdiscountwindow.org/pages/discount-rates/current-discount-rates)[^285]
as otherwise it doesn't constitute a last resort. Banks always have the
option to [borrow](#Borrow) from other banks and potential depositors.
Taxation is necessary to support the discount. So if the economic rate
of [interest](#Interest) is 10%, the state may lend to member banks at
3% and cover the difference with taxes.

The state has many sources of tax revenue, but typically central banks
subsidize discounted loan rates with
[seigniorage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^286]. Central
banks are known for proclaiming that they do not "print money", but this
is exactly what they do. The U.S. [Federal
Reserve](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federal_Reserve)[^287] ("Fed")
has the power to order [new
money](https://www.newyorkfed.org/aboutthefed/fedpoint/fed01.html)[^288]
from the U.S. Treasury's [Bureau of Engraving and
Printing](https://www.moneyfactory.gov/)[^289]. The Fed pays the
[printing
cost](https://www.federalreserve.gov/faqs/currency_12771.htm)[^290] for
"paper" money (actually
[cloth](https://www.moneyfactory.gov/hmimpaperandink.html)[^291]) and
face value for [coinage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coin)[^292]. The
Treasury is just the contractor that performs the work. Typically
coinage is produced such that it has slightly higher face value than
[use value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Use_value)[^293], in order to
prevent
[disappearance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gresham%27s_law)[^294] of
the coins. This use value must therefore be reduced when face value
declines relative to it, as the result of devaluation of the
corresponding fiat.

This implies that the [monetary
inflation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation)[^295] of
state fiat is literally the consequence of printing the "paper" money.
This process is somewhat obscured. The Fed does not first print the
money, stuff it in a vault, and then lend it out. This is unnecessary.
The order is reversed in practice. The Fed issues discounted loans, with
the *presumption* of money in its vault.

The [settlement process](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fedwire)
established by the Fed maintains track of how much money is in each
member bank's reserve. The bulk of settlements can often be
[netted](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Set-off_(law)#Close_out_netting)[^296],
but periodically money must be physically moved.

To further reduce transportation costs, a significant portion of member
bank reserves are required to be held in the Fed's own vault. This can
be achieved by purchasing Treasury securities
([Treasuries](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_Treasury_security)[^297])
that are [offered for
sale](https://www.stlouisfed.org/in-plain-english/a-closer-look-at-open-market-operations)[^298]
by the Fed. These are [money
substitutes](https://wiki.mises.org/wiki/Money_substitutes)[^299]
considered sufficient to satisfy member bank reserve requirements.
Treasuries are debt issued by the U.S. Treasury and generally purchased
in bulk on the [open
market](https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/TREAST)[^300] by the Fed. The
Fed reduces the yield of Treasuries (i.e. the rate of interest paid by
the state) by providing increased demand. It funds these operations in
the same essential manner as discounted loans to its member banks. The
distinction is merely that these purchases are discounted loans to the
state.

The Fed can *pretend* it has money in its vault and print it only as
required for settlement. This creates the illusion of monetary inflation
being the result of lending. But it is actually entirely the result of
the Fed's ability to purchase money at a discount, thereby funding the
loans. When a member bank requires money it can buy it from the Fed
using Treasuries. When the Fed's reserve of actual money is
insufficient, it simply makes a "withdrawal" from the taxpayer by
ordering money from the printer.

The Fed pays the Treasury the following amounts for dollar "bills":

  Denomination   Price
  -------------- ------------
  \$1            5.5 cents
  \$2            5.5 cents
  \$5            11.4 cents
  \$10           11.1 cents
  \$20           11.5 cents
  \$50           11.5 cents
  \$100          14.2 cents

If it had cost 5.5 cents to print a \$1 bill in 1915, it would now cost
about \$1.40 to do so. When the cost of printing a bill reaches its face
value, it has transitioned from fiat to [commodity
money](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commodity_money)[^301]. At that
point its seigniorage value is zero. As devaluation continues the
denomination must be discontinued. Observation of central banks engaged
in
[hyperinflation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyperinflation_in_Venezuelahttps:/en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zimbabwean_dollar)[^302]
is informative, as money reaches printing cost over much shorter periods
of time, and coins tend to disappear entirely. Issuance of larger
denomination notes allows the money to remain fiat as the commodity
money is abandoned. The [Zimbabwe
Dollar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zimbabwean_dollar)[^303] reached
100,000,000,000,000 unit bills before it was abandoned entirely in favor
of foreign currencies.

Without this ability to create fiat the Fed would be unable to settle
accounts, just as would any bank, if there was insufficient reserve
(including that which could be borrowed) to cover withdrawals and
defaults. Until the member bank must settle in money, such as in the
case of cash withdrawal at
[ATMs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automated_teller_machine)[^304],
[teller windows](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bank_teller)[^305] or
with non-member banks and other institutions, there is no need to move
the actual money, or print it.

But without the ability to print it below cost, the Fed would be subject
to default just as any other bank.

The total amount of U.S. Dollars in
[circulation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_supply#United_States)[^306]
is referred to as "M0". This includes all tangible currency ("vault
cash") plus intangible bank balances in Federal Reserve accounts. These
two forms are considered interchangeable
"[obligations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_supply#Money_creation_by_commercial_banks)"[^307]
(money) of the Fed. The intangible obligations are money that is
accounted for but not yet printed.

As borrowing by member banks is reduced, such as by the Fed raising its
interest rates, the Fed's obligations can be destroyed with the opposite
effect of its printing. While the Fed has [contracted
M0](https://tradingeconomics.com/united-states/money-supply-m0)[^308] by
almost 20% in the four years since its peak in 2015, this comes at a
cost to tax revenue. The Fed masquerades as a non-profit organization,
remitting net income from its [loans to the U.S.
Treasury](https://www.stlouisfed.org/on-the-economy/2018/september/fed-payments-treasury-rising-interest-rates)[^309]
annually.

> The Federal Reserve increased the federal funds rate target seven
> times since between Dec. 2015 and June 2018. This has implications for
> the path of the federal deficit and federal debt in two ways:\
> \
> \* Directly through net interest payments\
> \* Indirectly through the yearly remittances from the Fed to the U.S.
> Treasury Department\
> \
> The yearly remittances to the Treasury are essentially the leftover
> Fed revenue after operating expenses. By law, this additional revenue
> must be turned over to the Treasury.\
> \
> The revenue sent to the Treasury peaked at \$97.7 billion in 2015 and
> has been steadily falling since. In January, the Fed sent \$80.2
> billion to the Treasury.\
> \
> *Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis*

This "leftover Fed revenue" is that which is earned, after operating
expenses, from loans of money printed by the U.S. Treasury at nominal
cost, guaranteed by its [monopoly
protection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Counterfeit)[^310] in doing
so. So the net result is that the Treasury prints new money and then
recaptures the money earned as interest on that money printed. As shown
above, the Treasury also borrows money at discounted rates indirectly
financed by the Fed, through the issuance of Treasury securities.
**While money is not printed and then deposited directly into the
Treasury, the result is the same.**

State [monopoly money](#collectible-tautology)[^311] is not created *ex
nihilo* by fraudulent bank accounting. It is literally created from [old
blue
jeans](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2013/12/16/how-tight-jeans-almost-ruined-americas-money)[^312]
by the state.

The transition to a modern "[cashless
society](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/21/business/sweden-cashless-society.html)"[^313]
implies that central banks would retain the existing form of accounting
for not-yet-printed fiat, and simply perform all settlement internally.
This eliminates printing and settlement transportation costs, and
ensures full censorability. An instance of
[Fedcoin](#fedcoin-objectives)[^314], such as the experimental
[e-Krona](https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/payments--cash/e-krona)[^315],
would be required for people to transact with state money
electronically. Bitcoin serves the same purpose, but without state
control over either issuance ([mining](#Mine)) or
[confirmation](#Confirmation). For these reasons Bitcoin cannot be
expected to act as the [reserve
currency](#reserve-currency-fallacy)[^316] (money) for state banking, as
it would necessarily follow the same trajectory as the failed [gold
standard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_standard)[^317]. Bitcoin's
[value proposition](#value-proposition)[^318] is in the avoidance of
state money.

# Mining

## ASIC Monopoly Fallacy

There is a theory that Bitcoin
[ASIC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Application-specific_integrated_circuit)[^319]
price is controlled by a
[cartel](https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/1059)[^320]
of [miners](#Miner), creating a disproportionate advantage to
[mining](#Mine) partners of the cartel.

There is no economic difference between a cartel and a single
organization. Changing organizational size is a free [market](#Market)
outcome observable as capital seeks optimal [economies of
scale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economies_of_scale)[^321]. If
partners receive ASICs at a price that produces a below market return on
capital, it amounts to an internal subsidy between partners. The same is
true of a price that produces an above market return on capital, with
the subsidy in the opposite direction. As such there is no net advantage
to such discounting between partners.

Production is generally set at a level intended to produce a maximum
[rate of return[^322]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rate_of_return) on
capital. The only economically rational way for a producer to raise
price is to limit production below that optimum. Otherwise higher price
implies unsold inventory, resulting in lower net returns. This implies
that production must be restricted by the cartel in order to raise [unit
price](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unit_price)[^323] for non-partners.

Limiting production leaves an opportunity for other producers to capture
customers with a lower [marginal
utility](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marginal_utility)[^324] for the
product, as those customers would otherwise be unserved. Thus
competition lowers price until the market clears. A free market seeks
the clearing price that produces the global return on capital
([interest](#Interest)). A current price above this level increases
production and below decreases production. It is [time
preference](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_preference)[^325] that
determines the rate of interest.

Unless production is disproportionately subject to anti-market forces,
such as tax or subsidy, everyone enjoys the same opportunity to raise
capital and compete in production.

If competition does not arise it implies that returns on this line of
business are at least consistent with average market returns. Tax and
subsidy cause regional [distortions](#Distortion) but do not eliminate
competition. **In other words, monopoly price is only achievable by
state grant of monopoly power.**

A related theory asserts that purchasing ASICs from this cartel
increases its [hash power](#Hash_Power). This is invalid on the basis of
the above explanation of monopolistic pricing. The producer's capital
will seek the same return in any line of business or investment. There
is no reason to believe that the return will be disproportionate in
ASICs.

A related theory asserts that the Bitcoin
[proof-of-work](#Proof_Of_Work) algorithm produces a [pooling
pressure](#pooling-pressure-risk)[^326], as a consequence of the
supposed cartelization. If people truly believe that ASICs are
overpriced the rational response is to raise capital and produce ASICs.
But in any case, market and anti-market ([state](#State)) forces alone
control chip production and as such it does not constitute a
protocol-based [pooling](#Political) pressure.

## Balance of Power Fallacy

[Power](#Power) in Bitcoin rests with [miners](#Miner) and
[merchants](#Merchant). Yet these two powers are not "balanced" between
each other, as if locked in some sort of
[checks-and-balances](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Separation_of_powers)[^327]
system. Miner power is
[orthogonal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orthogonality)[^328] to
merchant power. Miners control [transaction](#Transaction) selection,
merchants control [validity](#Validity), and neither can control the
other. Not surprisingly, in the original
[description](https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf)[^329] and
[implementation](#Implementation) these roles were combined.

![](media/image30.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

Power is not the same as influence. Merchants can influence miners by
not buying the service. Miners can similarly influence merchants by not
producing it. These choices manifest as [splits](#Split) or
[stalls](#Stall). However the nature of power is that it can (and often
does) ignore influence. The [state](#State) has power; it can apply
[coercion](#Coercion) and [co-option](#Co_option) while ignoring
influence. Merchants and miners *together* have the power to
[defend](#risk-sharing-principle)[^330] against these aggressions, but
neither can do so without the support of the other.

![](media/image32.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

The balance of power in Bitcoin is between *individuals* and the state.
Even states create systems that
[attempt](https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/bios/board/default.htm)[^331]
to isolate their moneys from [political](#Political) control. Bitcoin is
no different in that sense, incorporating the [resistance
axiom](#axiom-of-resistance)[^332]. Individuals can be miners and can be
merchants. With broad distribution of these activities it becomes
difficult for state actors to [censor](#Censorship) this
[market](#Market). **The idea that miners and merchants are in an
adversarial position is a failure to understand the Bitcoin security
model.**

![](media/image34.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

Merchants purchase a service from miners and as such the two are engaged
in [trade](#Trade). Merchants purchase mining services that conform to
their [rules](#Rule) for a satisfactory [fee](#Fee). They are free to
split and miners are free to not mine at all, or to not select
particular transactions for whatever reason suits them. Trade is neither
adversarial nor asymmetrical, it is voluntary and mutually-beneficial,
with all tensions resolved in [price](#Price).

This failure in understanding leads people to believe that mining can be
centrally [pooled](#Political) as long as merchants are not
[centralized](#Centralization) in validation, as the [economy](#Economy)
can control the behavior of mining, rendering the system secure. This
belief is incorrect but unfortunately people are drawing this invalid
[conclusion](https://www.coindesk.com/uasf-revisited-will-bitcoins-user-revolt-leave-lasting-legacy)[^333]
from recent events. A [closely-related
fallacy](#proof-of-work-fallacy)[^334] is that a
[proof-of-work](#Proof_Of_Work) [hard fork](#Hard_Fork) by merchants can
control miner behavior.

## Byproduct Mining Fallacy

There is a theory that, to the extent Bitcoin [mining](#Mine) can
consume a necessary and otherwise unmarketable
[byproduct](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waste)[^335] of energy
production, such as [unused natural
gas](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gas_flare)[^336], a reduction in
marketable energy consumption is implied.

Given a new byproduct [market](#Market), not taking advantage of the
presumed lower [price](#Price) represents [opportunity
cost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost)[^337] to each
[miner](#Miner). Competition for the byproduct increases its price,
eventually up to the level where the net advantage is eliminated. In the
interim this represents a mining profit
[opportunity](https://bitcoinist.com/bitcoin-mining-waste-oil-industry)[^338].

[Paradoxically](#efficiency-paradox)[^339], any reduced cost results in
proportionally greater consumption. The reduced cost of mining must
result in increased mining so that its cost returns to the
[reward](#Reward) level. So the byproduct formerly "consumed" as waste
increases mining hash rate until the same cost is consumed in mining.
Net mining energy consumption is actually increased by the lower
[price](#Price).

Yet in monetizing a waste resource, the overall marketable energy supply
is increased without an increase in its production cost. And demand for
the otherwise marketable energy supply in mining is decreased. This
implies a reduced market energy price.

A corresponding expansion of production generally may result from a
reduced market energy price. This [price
stability](#_Stability_Property)[^340] is a general characteristic of
all products. **As such a consequent reduction in overall energy
consumption from byproduct mining cannot be assumed**, invalidating the
theory. However, an overall increase in wealth is implied by greater
production at the same cost or same production at lower cost.

## Causation Fallacy

There is a theory that [mining](#Mine) "follows" [price](#Price), or
more specifically, [reward](#Reward) [value](#Value). The implication is
that mining is slaved to price, lacking any input into [coin](#Coin)
[utility](#Utility).

Consider the [miner](#Miner) who responds only to historical reward
values. This [person](#Person) cannot be the first miner, because the
reward has no historical value. No price can be established because no
[trades](#Trade) have occurred. The miner might have heard that a number
of [unconfirmed](#Unconfirmed) [units](#Unit) bought a pizza, but maybe
the same units are [double-spent](#Double_Spend). He must anticipate a
certain level of future net return on capital that is unknowable until
it either materializes, or does not. This is the nature of
entrepreneurial risk. The risk must be taken before the product can
exist. One might believe that the risk can be shifted to the consumer,
with advance ordering. But at that point the consumer has become the
entrepreneur, providing the capital for, and assuming the risk of,
production.

It is certainly possible for a miner to respond only to historical
reward values once history has been established by someone else's
risk-taking. But what is the time window and method of averaging that
predicts future reward values? The unique ability to predict
[exchange](#Exchange) prices would provide the miner unlimited riches.
If it could be done generally, price would never change, as all
potential changes would be discounted upon first minting. So either
price changes unpredictably, or not at all. In other words, every miner
faces the same situation as the first. Historical prices do not exist
that can predict future prices.

Assuming a [market](#Market) average return on mining capital generally,
both overestimation and underestimation of reward value imply loss in
relation to the cost of capital. Given the nature of competition,
profits and losses (above and below market returns on capital
respectively) experience constant negative existential pressure. In
other words, the market attempts to eliminate these errors. But given
the unpredictable nature of price, it can never actually do so.
Production never seeks demand that exists, which is inherently
historical, it always seeks demand that it anticipates. **Production
continues to guess at future consumption and in doing so creates the
opportunity for consumption.**

![](media/image36.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

Miners trade their capital for units of bitcoin. In doing so they are a
fraction of the overall demand for bitcoin. Yes miners do not
independently establish price. Their particular demand is no more
impactful on price than is that of a non-miner with the same level of
demand.

One could say that miners converge on a market return on capital by
anticipating *highest* possible [fee](#Fee) values. But
[merchants](#Merchant) similarly converge on a market return on miner
capital by seeking the *lowest* possible fee value. However, miners must
anticipate overall demand and risk mining before there can be any
utility. So to the extent that there is any asymmetry, mining precedes
[transacting](#Transaction), just as all production must precede
consumption. Assuming otherwise conflates the direction a market seeks
with the manner in which it does so.

## Decoupled Mining Fallacy

There is a theory that [security](#qualitative-security-model)[^341] is
increased by [decoupling](#Decentralization) [reward](#Reward) from
[transaction](#Transaction) selection in [pooled](#Political)
[mining](#Mine). The theory holds that by sharing only the reward,
control over transaction selection shifts to [miners](#Miner) with less
[hash power](#Hash_Power). This implies a reduction in the [variance
discount](#_Variance_Discount_Flaw)[^342] and therefore an increase in
the [competitiveness](#censorship-resistance-property)[^343] of smaller
mines. Because smaller mines can presumably operate more covertly than
larger, this in turn implies that [censorship](#Censorship)
[resistance](#axiom-of-resistance)[^344] is increased.

**The theory fails to recognize that control over transaction selection
remains with the pool operator and** is therefore invalid. The sole
benefit is [variance](#Variance) reduction, but this is only realized by
the receipt of payment. As payment is discretionary any condition may be
attached. Such conditions may include censorship and
[identity](#Identity). Member recourse is to leave the pool for another,
just as with a coupled pool. As such decoupled pools and coupled pools
are equally subject to [co-option](#Co_option).

![](media/image38.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

There is a related theory that transparency of a decoupled pool is
greater than that of a coupled pool, facilitating flight of members to
non-censoring pools, therefore limiting the dominance of censoring
pools. Generously accepting the assumptions of greater transparency and
independent miners operating against financial self-interest, we are
still left with the fact of co-option. The [state](#State) can still
reserve for itself the ability to operate with the financial advantages
of [pooling](#pooling-pressure-risk)[^345] and the theory is therefore
invalid.

This fallacy is similar to the [Relay Fallacy](#relay-fallacy)[^346] in
that all financial advantage depends on otherwise independent miners
granting control over that advantage to a single [person](#Person).

## Dedicated Cost Principle

Unnecessary costs incurred by [miners](#Miner) contribute nothing to
either [double-spend](#Double_Spend) resistance or [censorship
resistance](#censorship-resistance-property)[^347]. Such costs
constitute true waste, representing nothing more than a given miner's
inefficiency. For example, it does not contribute to security if a miner
with misconfigured [machines](#Machine) expends a great deal of energy
while being unable to win a [reward](#Reward) due to the
misconfiguration. Any cost that is not strictly required for the optimal
generation of [hash power](#Hash_Power) is not a necessary cost. A
misconfiguration by one miner does not represent cost to another.

There is a theory that [proof-of-work](#Proof_Of_Work) (PoW) can be made
more [energy efficient](#efficiency-paradox)[^348] by introducing
non-dedicated costs to the [mining](#Mine) function. One such example is
the discovery of [prime numbers](http://primecoin.io/)[^349]. The reason
to incorporate such costs is that the resulting discoveries have
presumed marketable value. If not there would objectively be no value in
the incorporation.

By analogy, brewers can sell their grain byproducts to farmers. This
improves their efficiency by reducing cost. So to the extent that the
resulting byproduct is valuable, its production does not incur a net
cost. Yet necessary net cost must rise to the level of reward, as a
consequence of competition. Therefore the same result would be achieved
by basic PoW consuming the full reward value and independent
energy-consuming operations generating the marketable products. **Any
cost dedicated to the production of independently-marketable value can
be offset by selling that byproduct.** As such the theory is invalid.

![](media/image40.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

[Merged mining](https://eprint.iacr.org/2017/791.pdf)[^350] is typically
implemented to resolve the problem of bootstrapping a new coin past the
vulnerable stage of low [hash rate](#Hash_Rate). This design fails to
recognize that hash rate not dedicated to the new [coin](#Coin) does not
contribute to its security. As the full cost of the hash rate can be
recouped by selling it on one [chain](#Chain), there is no cost to
[censor](#Censorship) the other merge-mined chain(s).

![](media/image42.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

## Efficiency Paradox

Bitcoin [mining](#Mine) overall cannot be made more efficient in terms
of real cost. Given that all costs resolve to energy, this could be
restated as, Bitcoin cannot be made more energy efficient.
[Paradoxically](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paradox)[^351], no matter
what technology improvement is introduced, the cost of
[transaction](#Transaction) [confirmation](#Confirmation) remains the
sum of the [reward](#Reward) for confirmation.

**This apparent contradiction arises from the fact that reward
ultimately determines cost.** An increase in [hash rate](#Hash_Rate) for
the same cost results in a [difficulty](#Difficulty) increase to
maintain the [block](#Block) [period](#Period), increasing cost
accordingly. Bitcoin mining must always consume in cost the amount of
its current reward.

## Empty Block Fallacy

There is a theory that the [mining](#Mine) of empty [blocks](#Block) is
an [attack](#Attack). The theory does not require that the blocks are
mined on a [weak](#Weak) [branch](#Branch) in an attempt to enable
[double-spending](#Double_Spend), nor does it specify what
[person](#Person) is attacked.

Consider the following:

-   The term "attack" implies theft. [The Bitcoin
    whitepaper](https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf)[^352], for example,
    uses the term only to describe double-spend attempts.

-   A [reward](#Reward) consists of [fees](#Fee) for
    [transactions](#Transaction) and a [subsidy](#Subsidy) for the
    block. The [miner](#Miner) who forgoes transaction fees by not
    including transactions is not rewarded for them.

-   The miner's [hash power](#Hash_Power) contributes proportionally to
    the security of the network. The subsidy is compensation for that
    security during the [inflationary](#Inflation) phase. The purpose of
    inflation is to rationally distribute [units](#Unit). The rational
    distribution is specifically in [exchange](#Exchange) for hash
    power, not for transaction inclusion.

-   Transaction [confirmation](#Confirmation) is not assured. Fees are
    the incentive for confirmation. Lack of confirmation objectively
    implies insufficient fee.

-   Empty block mining is entirely consistent with [consensus
    rules](#Consensus_Rules) and cannot be reasonably prevented by a new
    [rule](#Rule).

Furthermore, if 10% of the hash power mines empty blocks, then
confirmations will take 10% longer on average. Yet if a miner removes
10% of the total hash power, confirmations will also take 10% longer on
average, until the next [difficulty](#Difficulty)
[adjustment](#Adjustment). Mining an empty block is therefore
indistinguishable from not mining.

It is worth exploring the source of the fallacy. Because of the [Zero
Sum Property](#pooling-pressure-risk)[^353], there may be an assumption
that mining an empty block "unfairly" takes away the opportunity for
transactions to be confirmed.

A miner commits capital to mining, producing hash power. Setting aside
the [effects of pooling](#pooling-pressure-risk)[^354], the miner is
subsidized in proportion to hash rate. Without this [work](#Work) other
miners would produce the same average number of blocks at proportionally
lower difficulty. In other words, *actual* attacks would be
proportionally cheaper. So despite not being rewarded for including
transactions, the empty block miner is securing previously-confirmed
transactions.

Given that the [marginal
cost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marginal_cost)[^355] of including a
transaction is necessarily below average fee levels, the empty block
miner is suffering an [opportunity
cost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost)[^356]. This
amounts to the miner subsidizing the security of the [chain](#Chain).

![](media/image44.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

While this seems economically irrational, it can be otherwise due to the
offsetting opportunity cost for waiting on a new non-empty
[candidate](#Candidate) following an [announcement](#Announcement). **To
the extent that it reduces miner costs, empty block mining can have no
impact on either fees or confirmation rate.** The theory is therefore
invalid.

While a given miner may consider it advantageous to mine empty blocks,
it is within every other person's [power](#Power) to do otherwise. It is
ultimately the exercise of this competitive and self-interested
opportunity that secures the [coin](#Coin), against actual attacks.

## Energy Exhaustion Fallacy

There is a theory that [proof-of-work](#Proof_Of_Work) may exhaust all
energy available to [people](#Person). PoW converts energy into a
[monotonically
increasing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monotonic_function)[^357]
[double-spend](#Double_Spend) barrier for any given
[transaction](#Transaction). This is comparable to the energy expended
in securing any money against counterfeit (by its own issuer or
otherwise).

The purpose of any security measure is to create a cost necessary to
overcome the measure, i.e. a financial barrier. Bitcoin creates its
double-spend barrier by compelling the [attacker](#Attack) to replace
the [branch](#Branch) of the targeted transaction with one of
probabilistically greater [work](#Work). Interestingly, such a
replacement raises the barrier to subsequent attackers. **The energy
expended is not independently important, the erected barrier is the
attacker's necessary financial burden.**

The security barrier (S) of a [block](#Block) is the product of unit
[hash](#Hash) cost (C), [hash rate](#Hash_Rate) (H), and
[period](#Period) (T).

> S = C \* H \* T

The [adjustment](#Adjustment) varies hash rate to maintain a constant
period for a given hash cost and security.

> T = S / (C \* H)

A constant period implies that hash rate is inversely proportional to
cost for a given security.

> H \~ S / C

![](media/image46.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

As energy supply is reduced its [price](#Price) must increase, which
reduces the amount expended for a given level of security. Therefore
energy cannot be exhausted by [mining](#Mine) and the theory is invalid.

## Energy Store Fallacy

There is a theory that the [value](#Value) of energy expended by
[proof-of-work](#Proof_Of_Work) is converted to [coin](#Coin) value, in
effect "storing" the energy for later consumption. Assuming that energy
and the coin have value to [people](#Person) at some future time, they
can again be [traded](#Trade).

Yet this is at best a poor metaphor. Miners trade energy for
[units](#Unit). However *all* [merchants](#Merchant) who accept units of
the coin trade something for it, and *all things* offered in trade
represent demand. The theory errs in the implication that energy value
expended in [mining](#Mine) is unique in its contribution to value.
**Apart from magnitude, one source of demand cannot be a generally
greater determinant of value than another**. As such the theory is
invalid.

Furthermore, it is a similar error to assert that
[money](#collectible-tautology)[^358] is a [store of
value](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Store_of_value)[^359]. Money is a
store of money. Only objects can actually be stored. The value of money
derives entirely from the value of what it can be traded for, to the
people trading. As [value is
subjective](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value)[^360],
it is human preference, subject to constant and unpredictable change,
and cannot be stored.

## Energy Waste Fallacy

There is a theory that [proof-of-work](#Proof_Of_Work) wastes energy.
This implies that the level of security provided is greater than
necessary, or the same level of security can be provided by another
externalized [proof](#Proof) at a lower energy cost. An *internalized*
proof, specifically
[proof-of-stake](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proof-of-stake)[^361], is
a different security model which is [not cryptodynamically
secure](#proof-of-stake-fallacy)[^362], and is not considered here.

Total [hash power](#Hash_Power) is a function of [reward](#Reward),
which is a function of [fees](#Fee), which are determined by the
[confirmation](#Confirmation) [market](#Market). If a [person](#Person)
considers current hash power insufficient to secure [trade](#Trade) at a
given [value](#Value) against [double-spend](#Double_Spend) then the
[depth](#Depth) requirement increases. Additionally, as shown in
[Utility Threshold Property](#utility-threshold-property)[^363],
[transactions](#Transaction) with insufficient value for even single
confirmation security are [priced](#Price) out of the [chain](#Chain).

These upper and lower security bounds depend on confirmation cost and
are therefore independent of the proof technique. **There is no
necessary level of security, just a subjective confirmation depth and
minimum utility.**

Confirmation security increases with the cost of generating each
[block](#Block). The double-spend of a transaction requires that its
[branch](#Branch) be superseded by another with a probabilistically
greater cost. So energy cost can be reduced only by expending the same
average cost for a given confirmation time, but with a lower energy
component.

[Work](#Work) incurs cost in several forms, including labor, hardware,
services, land, etc. Any other externalized proof consumes these same
resources, though potentially in different proportion. The question of
energy cost reduction is therefore reduced to whether an energy
component of the cost of a proof can be replaced by another resource
component with the same cost. However the cost of the substitute
resource includes all of its production costs, which must resolve to
energy. The theory is therefore invalid.

![](media/image48.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

Additionally, securing any [coin](#Coin) incurs a cost to
[merchants](#Merchant). As such the fact of its use by them implies that
it is preferred over alternatives. This implies the alternatives are
ultimately more costly. As all costs are fundamentally resolved in
energy consumption, it follows that the
[money](#collectible-tautology)[^364] in use is the most energy
efficient.

## Fee Recovery Fallacy

There is a theory that [miners](#Miner) gain financial advantage over
other miners by mining their own [transactions](#Transaction) and
"recovering" their own [fees](#Fee).

The theory ignores the [opportunity
cost](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost)[^365] of mining
[block](#Block) space without collecting payment for it. Payment of a
fee *of any amount* to one's self is a financial non-event. Failure to
collect a fee is a real cost in the amount forgone, as the cost of
mining that portion of the block is uncompensated. **The actual fee paid
by the miner is the opportunity forgone.**

There is a related theory that fee estimation tools may be fooled into
recommending higher fees than are required. As shown in [Side Fee
Fallacy](#side-fee-fallacy)[^366] this assumes a relationship between
historical and future fee rates that does not exist, and that all fees
are visible on [chain](#Chain), which is not the case.

## Halving Fallacy

Bitcoin [consensus rules](#Consensus_Rules) produce a predictable rate
of monetary [inflation](#Inflation)*.* This rate is reduced periodically
at a point called the [halving](#Halving). There are several [step
functions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Step_function)[^367] in
Bitcoin. The halving occurs every 210,000 [strong](#Strong)
[blocks](#Block), the [difficulty](#Difficulty)
[adjustment](#Adjustment) every 2,016 strong blocks and [chain](#Chain)
[organization](#Organization) approximately every 10 minutes. The
numeric values that control these intervals are arbitrary, yet the
discontinuity is necessary due to the discrete intervals required for
[proof-of-work](#Proof_Of_Work). There is a theory that the halving
creates a financial cliff for [miners](#Miner) that may lead to a
perpetual [stall](#Stall). The theory is based on the confluence of two
step functions (halving and difficulty), causing the period of another
(organization) to expand dramatically due to coincident reduction in
miner [profits](#Profit).

The theory assumes that the difficulty adjustment resets average miner
[financial
profit](http://www.investopedia.com/terms/e/economicprofit.asp)[^368] to
zero, allowing only the top half of miners (by profitability) to
survive, eventually reducing [mining](#Mine) to just a few miners. In
other words the difficulty adjustment is considered a positive [pooling
pressure](#pooling-pressure-risk)[^369]. However there is no reason to
believe that the adjustment reduces *any* miner's profit to zero. The
consequence of the assumption is not that there will be *few* miners,
but that there will be *none*, due to the difficulty adjustment alone.
The adjustment actually does nothing to regulate miner profits, it
controls only the organization period. With no adjustment, profit would
be unaffected while the organization period and therefore
[variance](#Variance) would respond to total [hash rate](#Hash_Rate).
[Time preference](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_preference)[^370],
which dictates [market](#Market) return on capital, regulates miner
profits just as it does in every market.

Consider the case of no [price](#Price) change. In this case there is no
reason to expect a change in total hash rate, no adjustments to
difficulty, and we can conclude that the average [mine](#Mine) generates
the market return on capital. In other words any number of independent
miners can compete indefinitely (absent actual pooling pressures).

Consider also that price changes, difficulty adjustments, and
[reward](#Reward) fluctuations all effect miner profitability in the
same manner. A difficulty adjustment and/or halving is therefore no more
important to a miner than a comparable price fluctuation, and exhibits
greater predictability.

The theory also contemplates that reward may be insufficient to
compensate miners for difficulty immediately following a halving. As
such they may opt to reduce hash rate, extending
[confirmation](#Confirmation) times until fees rise, price rises and/or
difficulty adjusts downward. Yet fees and price are determined in a
market and can certainly rise to any level that [people](#Person) are
willing to pay.

**There is no way to know what levels the market will support, but price
continues to have a much greater impact than halvings.** The largest
halvings have passed with no disruption. Given that subsequent halvings
will produce the equivalent of an exponentially *lesser* price
reduction, there is no reason to believe future events will be any more
interesting than past.

## Impotent Mining Fallacy

There is a theory that [miners](#Miner) have no [power](#Power). This is
distinct from the closely related [Proof of Work
Fallacy](#proof-of-work-fallacy)[^371]. The theory rests on the
assumption that miners are subject to economic pressures that preclude
sustained effective [attacks](#Attack). This theory leads
[people](#Person) to believe that mining can be strongly
[pooled](#Political) as long as [merchants](#Merchant) are not
[centralized](#Centralization), as the economy can control the behavior
of mining, rendering the system secure. The consequence of this invalid
theory is complacency regarding the insecurity caused by pooling.

The theory holds that if [majority hash power](#Majority_Hash_Power)
[double-spends](#Double_Spend) then merchants will necessarily increase
[confirmation](#Confirmation) [depth](#Depth) requirements, increasing
the cost of subsequent attacks. At some point an equilibrium is reached
where greater depths are considered sufficient for
[exchange](#Exchange). Given that this would preclude double spending
altogether, there would be no advantage to sustaining the attack. The
theory accepts that attacks can happen, but not frequently enough to
materially reduce [utility](#Utility).

The theory also holds that a miner cannot avoid selecting the highest
[fee](#Fee) [transactions](#Transaction) as this reduces relative
[reward](#Reward), enriching other miners. This is presumed to lead to a
loss of majority power and therefore an inability to continue. This
aspect of the theory implies that miners cannot effectively
[censor](#Censorship).

The theory also considers that [selfish](#Selfish) [mining](#Mine) by
[majority hash power](#Majority_Hash_Power) is feasible, but in the
absence of double-spending and censorship, there is no adverse
consequence to the [economy](#Economy). In this case the majority simply
becomes the one miner as all others are unable to retain rewards.
Despite lack of competition, [hash rate](#Hash_Rate) and fee levels are
maintained by the ever-looming *possibility* of competition.

Yet miners and merchants are trading partners, engaged voluntarily in
mutually-beneficial activity. As explored in the [Balance of Power
Fallacy](#balance-of-power-fallacy)[^372], neither can control the other
and [price](#Price) is the resolution of all preferences. This would
seem to support the theory, however **the theory does not address the
threat**, and is actually a [red
herring](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red_herring)[^373]. Bitcoin is
designed to defend against *non-market* forces, specifically the
[state](#State). Market forces are never a threat to the
[market](#Market) itself.

The pooling of [hash power](#Hash_Power) eviscerates security, as states
can simply [co-opt](#Co_option) it. But states can also build their own
[mines](#Mine) to the same effect. Bitcoin therefore requires both
significant hash power *and* distribution of that power among
[people](#Person) who are willing and able to [risk state
controls](#risk-sharing-principle)[^374].

The state is an economically rational actor. [Inflation](#Inflation) is
profitable for the issuer. Bitcoin's widespread use would prevent states
from effectively levying the [inflation
tax](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^375]. State attacks are
therefore expected, and analogous attacks are
[commonplace](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_exchange_controls)[^376].
It is practically inevitable that states will subsidize attacks, but
even the possibility invalidates the theory.

## Miner Business Model

[Miners](\l) play a [zero sum
game](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero-sum_game)[^377] within a
[positive sum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Win-win_game)[^378]
[economy](#Economy). They compete with each other, not the economy.
Rising [utility](#Utility) is the reflection of a positive sum and a
natural consequence of [trade](#Trade).

It has been argued that [blocks](#Block) mined in a period of rising
price produce outsized returns for miners, at least until the
[difficulty](#Difficulty) [adjustment](#Adjustment). This idea is based
on the common failure to understand that market prices are not
[predictable](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chaos_theory)[^379]. Wagers
on price change are speculative. There is no reason to assume that
Bitcoin [speculation](#Speculate) is any more or less effective than any
other. To the extent that a rising price is generally predictable by
miners, competition predict its, invalidating the idea of any inherent
outsized return.

Bitcoin mining [investment](#Lend) on the other hand is based on the
predictable relationship between [profit](#Profit) and competition over
time. That relationship predicts that the average of all mining
approaches the market rate of [interest](#Interest). As with all
markets, shorter time periods are unpredictable in price and longer
periods approach market returns. Ultimately [time
preference](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_preference)[^380]
controls the market rate of investment return.

So how does a miner achieve outsized returns? It cannot be done with
[side fee agreements](#side-fee-fallacy)[^381]. There is only one way to
make a higher-than-market rate of return, which is to have a below
average cost of [hash power](#Hash_Power) for the [coin](#Coin). This is
achieved by either taking advantage of [pooling
pressures](#pooling-pressure-risk)[^382] or through superior operational
efficiency. Because of the [zero sum
property](#zero-sum-property)[^383], these are offset by
lower-than-market rates of return by other miners. The premium therefore
declines for an [honest](#Honest) miner above 50% hash power, to zero at
100%.

![](media/image50.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

However other miners will eventually exit as their capital seeks market
returns. This would leave one miner, bound to market returns. In other
words, making outsized returns requires others from whom to capture
those returns. The highest return that can be sustained is a function of
the greatest opportunity cost others are willing to sustain. This is a
function of differential reward utility, as discussed in [Threat Level
Paradox](#threat-level-paradox)[^384].

By limiting [dividends](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dividend)[^385] to
market rates of return and reinvesting all remaining reward, a miner can
maintain a constant hash power and thereby obtain market returns against
a capital base proportional to Bitcoin
[capitalization](#Capitalization). Reinvesting dividends increases hash
power and liquidation decreases it. [Grinds](#Grind) are liquidated by
taking each device offline as it becomes a net negative producer, or
[discounting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Present_value)[^386] those
future returns by selling the device.

**Mining rate of return on capital is dependent on time preference
alone.** The relationship between the economy and miners is further
explored in [Balance of Power Fallacy](#balance-of-power-fallacy)[^387].

## Pooling Pressure Risk

[Pooling](\l) pressure is the set of financial incentives for [hash
rate](#Hash_Rate) [aggregation](#Aggregation), specifically:

-   [Proximity Premium](#proximity-premium-flaw)[^388]

-   [Variance Discount](#_Variance_Discount_Flaw)[^389]

-   [Market Variation](#Variation)

-   [Market Distortion](#Distortion)

-   [Economies of
    Scale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economies_of_scale)[^390]

[Latency](#Latency) and [variance](#Variance) are unavoidable. The
[consensus rules](#Consensus_Rules) actually create these first two
financial incentives. Variation is a consequence of varying
[market](#Market) price for [mining](#Mine) resources. Distortion is a
consequence of varying non-market costs including tax, regulation,
subsidy, and patent; the force that Bitcoin is intended to
[resist](#axiom-of-resistance)[^391]. In a high threat environment
economies of scale may become negative due to the cost associated with
greater
[visibility](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/09/big-in-venezuela/534177/)[^392]
but may otherwise be positive.

There are several manifestations of pooling. One is geographic, where
independent [miners](#Miner) become physically closer together. Another
is cooperative, where formerly independent miners join forces and
co-locate [grinding](#Grind). Another is virtual, where miners become
[grinders](#Grinder) and aggregate hash rate to a single remote miner.
Another is the use of [relays](#relay-fallacy)[^393], which
[aggregate](#Aggregation) miner [hash power](#Hash_Power). Another is
capital flow, since the higher [hash rate](#Hash_Rate) associated with
greater capital utilization is a form of co-location.

**Given a perpetual positive pressure, transaction selection will
eventually be reduced to one person's control.** It is possible that
this is already the case. The risk to Bitcoin is that one person is the
[sole defense](#risk-sharing-principle)[^394] of [utility](#Utility),
making successful [co-option](#Co_option) inevitable. This risk cannot
be [mitigated](#balance-of-power-fallacy)[^395] by the
[economy](#Economy).

Pooling pressure is a Bitcoin analogy to the [United States Federal
Reserve](https://www.federalreserve.gov/)[^396] system. The system was
[designed](#state-banking-principle)[^397] to facilitate tax through
[debasement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Debasement)[^398] of a market
money. It offered state
[support](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Legal_tender)[^399] for a
monetary
[proxy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federal_Reserve_Note)[^400] in
[trade](#Trade) for [market money](#money-taxonomy)[^401]. This
combination was designed to create a pressure to collect market money at
the central authority. Once this collection was sufficient the
[state](#State) did away with the pretense and simply
[seized](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Executive_Order_6102)[^402] all
remaining market money. All states have similar systems and
[cooperate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Monetary_Fund)[^403]
to defend them.

This does not imply that mining is adversarial to Bitcoin. Following the
analogy, [free
banking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_banking)[^404] is not
adversarial to gold. Mining is a necessary part of Bitcoin. Pooling
represents risk, though pooling pressure is not created by miners but by
flaws in Bitcoin itself.

## Proximity Premium Flaw

[Latency](\l) is the time required for [communication](#Communication).
Information moves at a speed not greater than the [speed of
light](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Speed_of_light)[^405] and therefore
latency cannot be eliminated.

Different distances between [miners](#Miner) implies
[announcements](#Announcement) will be known to some before others.
While a miner remains unaware of an announcement he wastes capital
[grinding](#Grind) on a [weak](#Weak) [candidate](#Candidate). As more
time passes it becomes exponentially less likely that the miner will be
[rewarded](#Reward) for the candidate. Miners therefore compete to see
announcements before other miners, as this reduces [opportunity
cost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost)[^406].

![](media/image52.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

If we were to disperse miners with equal [hash rate](#Hash_Rate) at
equidistant points around the Earth they would experience the same
average latency. Yet due to the financial benefit of reduced latency,
they would tend to move closer to each other. Miners obtain a premium on
returns for [aggregating](#Aggregation).

This proximity-based [pooling pressure](#pooling-pressure-risk)[^407] is
a consequence of the linear [block](#Block) ordering required by
[consensus rules](#Consensus_Rules). **Bitcoin prescribes
winner-take-all ordering, which produces disproportionate opportunity
cost.** The [variance discount](#_Variance_Discount_Flaw)[^408] is the
other pooling pressure caused by [consensus](#Consensus).

The [defense](#axiom-of-resistance)[^409] that Bitcoin *intends* to
raise is [market](#Market) defense against anti-market ([state](#State))
forces. To do this [hash power](#Hash_Power) must be distributed broadly
among [people](#Person) so that it becomes difficult to
[co-opt](#Co_option). However pooling pressures inherent in the
[consensus](#Consensus) work against this objective. As such the
characteristic is termed a flaw, though no way to eliminate the flaw has
been discovered.

## Relay Fallacy

The [peer-to-peer](#Peer_to_Peer) network disseminates [blocks](#Block)
and [unconfirmed](#Unconfirmed) [transactions](#Transaction). The
[protocol](#Proof_Of_Stake) itself allows [nodes](#Node) to protect
against [denial of service](#Denial_of_Service). Consequently this
[communication](#Communication) requires no [identity](#Identity). This
protection is how the network avoids the need for permission to
participate.

However this protection comes at a cost in terms of
[announcement](#Announcement) [latency](#Latency), and because of the
[advantage to proximity](#proximity-premium-flaw), lower latency
translates into higher apparent [hash power](#Hash_Power). Therefore
[miners](#Miner) compete for reduced latency. One way to reduce latency
is [pooling](#Political), another is to use a more efficient
dissemination network. Given that pooling surrenders [power](#Power) to
the operator, presumably the latter option is preferable.

![](media/image54.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

One way to improve dissemination is to *optimize* the peer-to-peer
network. The other is to join a distinct network, called a
[relay](#Relay), that has lower latency due to elimination of
denial-of-service protections, for
[example](http://bitcoinfibre.org)[^410]:

> \[T\]he cmpctblock message format was designed to ensure it fits
> neatly into a UDP-FEC-based relay mechanism. The only difference is
> that we send it over UDP with FEC\... This way, extra hops do not
> introduce more latency. Sadly, due to the nature of our FEC encoding,
> we cannot know if individual packets are a part of a legitimate, or
> any, block, and thus only enable this optimization between nodes run
> by the same group.\
> \
> *bitcoinfibre.org*

The relay accepts [communication](#Communication) from a set of miners,
over the peer-to-peer or other protocol. The relay consists of a set of
[machines](#Machine) under the control of the [relayer](#Relayer). It
communicates the announcements within its [internal
network](https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/blockstream-satellite-broadcasting-bitcoin-space)[^411]
and eventually to the joined miners.

The important security observation is that communication within the
relay is under the relayer's control. Due to the removal of
denial-of-service protections central control is *necessary* to the
scheme. The relayer can delay certain blocks based on miner, region,
[signal](#Signal), non-payment, etc. A relayer sells reduced latency,
and is therefore in the mining business. From a security standpoint it
matters not if this service is offered for free. Miners may similarly
offer [grinders](#Grinder) free reduced latency and
[variance](#Variance).

Relays are [aggregations](#Aggregation) of miners and miners are
aggregations of grinders. The greater the hash power aggregation, the
more profitable is the mine, as is the relay. One may consider that
grinders are free to leave mines and miners are free to leave relays,
and it is of course possible for a grinder to run his own mine and his
own relay. But larger aggregations are more profitable, so leaving the
largest relay or mine [increases relative
cost](#zero-sum-property)[^412].

A theory holds that relays reduce pooling pressure. This is an error.
**Any pooling reduction caused by a relay does not disappear but is
transferred to the relay as a pooling increase.** Relay statistics are
not typically presented alongside mining statistics, masking the power
transfer. This may lead people to believe that mining is less
strongly-pooled than is the case.

## Selfish Mining Fallacy

The term [selfish](#Selfish) [mining](#Mine) refers to a mining
*optimization*. However, one [academic
paper](https://www.cs.cornell.edu/~ie53/publications/btcProcFC.pdf)[^413]
frames the optimization as follows:

> Conventional wisdom asserts that the mining protocol is
> incentive-compatible and secure against colluding minority groups,
> that is, it incentivizes miners to follow the protocol as prescribed.
> We show that the Bitcoin mining protocol is not incentive-compatible.\
> \
> *Ittay Eyal and Emin GÃ¼n Sirer: Majority is not Enough*

This statement assumes a "prescribed Bitcoin mining protocol" that
precludes [withholding](#Withholding), which is a [straw
man](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Straw_man)[^414]. Bitcoin [consensus
rules](#Consensus_Rules) are necessarily silent on the timing of
[announcements](#Announcement).

![](media/image56.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

> We present an attack with which colluding miners obtain a revenue
> larger than their fair share.

This statement assumes a concept of "fair share" that is foreign to
Bitcoin, another straw man. A [miner](#Miner) is [rewarded](#Reward)
based on [blocks](#Block) that reach [maturity](#Maturity), not as a
proportion of actual [hash rate](#Hash_Rate)*.*

These straw men are explicitly attributed to "conventional wisdom". In
other words the paper uses them to show that the conventional wisdom is
incorrect. However, the paper errs in unconditionally declaring that
this supposedly *unfair violation of the protocol* constitutes an
attack:

> This attack can have significant consequences for Bitcoin: Rational
> miners will prefer to join the selfish miners, and the colluding group
> will increase in size until it becomes a majority. At this point, the
> Bitcoin system ceases to be a decentralized currency.

This is the source of the fallacy. It is not an attack for conventional
wisdom to be incorrect, it is an error in the presumed conventional
wisdom. Selfish mining implies that Bitcoin exhibits
[latency](#Latency)-based [pooling
pressure](#pooling-pressure-risk)[^415], though this is a
[well-established flaw](#proximity-premium-flaw)[^416]. All pooling
pressures tend to reduce the number of miners, exposing Bitcoin to
attacks.

**Optimizations are not attacks.** Pooling increases the *opportunity*
for attacks, but opportunity should not be conflated with action. The
term "[attack](#Attack)" implies theft. In fact, the Bitcoin
[whitepaper](https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf)[^417] uses the term only
to describe [double-spend](#Double_Spend) attempts.

## Side Fee Fallacy

There is a theory that [transaction](#Transaction) [fees](#Fee) paid
externally represent an individual incentive that works counter to
system security ([incentive
incompatible](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Incentive_compatibility)[^418]).
The theory holds that a [merchant](#Merchant) paying a [miner](#Miner)
"off-[chain](#Chain)" to [confirm](#Confirmation) the merchant's
transactions prevents other merchants' transactions from being
confirmed, or that it raises the cost of those confirmations, giving
advantage to those who accept such fees.

One impact of such arrangements is that an average *historical* fee rate
cannot be determined through chain analysis. The apparent rate would be
lower than the [market](#Market) rate. This could of course lead
[spenders](#Spend) to underestimate a sufficient fee. However there is
no aspect of Bitcoin that requires future fees to equal some average of
past fees. Estimation necessarily compensates, such as by ignoring
"free" transactions in full [blocks](#Block) or using [standard
deviation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_deviation)[^419] to
identify outliers. But fee estimation is just that, estimation. Actual
fee levels are controlled by competition.

Another impact is that disparate relative fee levels can highlight
certain transactions as being associated with such arrangements. This
can contribute to [taint](#Taint) of the merchant's transaction and/or
the miner's [coinbase](#Coinbase). But given the arrangement is a choice
made by the creators of these transactions, there is no privacy loss.

There is no impact on market fee rates or the ability of others to
obtain confirmations. If the arrangement deviates from market rates then
either the miner or the merchant is accepting an unnecessary loss. This
is no different than the miner confirming transactions with below-market
on-chain fees or the merchant overestimating on-chain fees,
respectively. In any case there would be no harm to system security even
if all fees were paid off chain.

![](media/image58.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

Bitcoin provides a mechanism for on-chain fees so that a transaction can
compensate *any* miner without the use of [identity](#Identity). It is a
privacy-preserving convenience. **If miners and merchants prefer to
weaken their own privacy by performing additional tasks, there is no
basis to consider that undesirable.** This theory is therefore invalid.

Furthermore the merchant must accept a delayed confirmation time
inversely proportional to the miner's [hash power](#Hash_Power). The
side-fee is offered at the market rate since the miner will incur an
opportunity cost otherwise.

![](media/image60.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

There is a related theory that side fee arrangements constitute a
[pooling pressure](#pooling-pressure-risk)[^420]. If fees paid are
consistent with the market there can be no effect on pooling. Above
market fees are a [state](#State) subsidy, as we must treat the subsidy
as not economically rational. Below market fees are a tax, as we must
treat the loss as involuntary. These are [distortions](#Distortion) just
like any other state subsidy/tax and are therefore not unique to side
fees. As such the existence of side fees does not create a new pooling
pressure beyond what exists with on-chain fees, and the theory is
therefore invalid.

## Spam Misnomer

The term
[spam](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_email_spam)[^421] in
computing originally referred to excessive Usenet cross-posting and
later became a synonym for unwanted broadcast email. While there is no
clear distinction between wanted and unwanted email, the messages carry
identity, are not fungible, and do not carry payment for processing by
the recipient. Bitcoin transactions by comparison are [necessarily
anonymous](#risk-sharing-principle)[^422], fungible and carry payment
for processing.

While email spam detection is a subjective process, it is necessary due
to the lack of payment for processing. This process is facilitated by
identity and lack of fungibility. By contrast, due to anonymity and the
fungibility objective, there is no test possible for
[transaction](#Transaction) legitimacy, and due to payment there is no
need for it. In other words **all valid transactions are equally
legitimate**, and this does not subject nodes to denial of service. A
proper name for a transaction with a low [fee](#Fee) is "low fee
transaction."

![](media/image62.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

High volume submission of redundant transactions is a typical denial of
service problem that is independent of the transaction fee and can be
carried out by any [person](#Person), not limited to the
[spender](#Spend). Non-redundant transactions that incorporate
mutually-conflicting spends are not a denial of service risk, since they
are either rejected as invalid or accepted due to a sufficient fee
increment.

## Variance Discount Flaw

[Variance](\l) is the varying frequency of achieving a
[reward](#Reward). Variance is inherent to the probabilistic nature of
mining and cannot be eliminated.

As a matter of [consensus](#Consensus), different [hash
power](#Hash_Power) among [miners](#Miner) implies rewards will be
earned by some more frequently than others. With 10% [hash
rate](#Hash_Rate) one might expect to be rewarded 10 times more
frequently than with 1%. Actual results are unpredictable and can vary
significantly. But it is sufficient here in both cases to assume
proportionality. In this example one miner receives a reward every 100
minutes and the other every 1000 minutes. Assuming identical rewards per
[block](#Block), the magnitude of the reward is also proportional to
hash power.

![](media/image64.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

Consider then that a tiny miner might have to wait years before any
reward. There is also the possibility that a mine is misconfigured and
can never succeed. Despite being rewarded proportionally, a smaller
miner is faced with a deficiency in relation to the larger miner. It
must improve [cash
flow](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operating_cash_flow)[^423] to
receive a fraction of the reward more frequently. For these reasons
miners discount returns for variance. Smaller miners will convert their
[mines](#Mine) to [grinds](#Grind) and pay an
[aggregating](#Aggregation) miner for reduced variance. Avoiding this
aggregation is the rationale behind
[P2Pool](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/P2Pool)[^424], but because
distributed variance reduction is less efficient, [pooling](#Political)
dominates.

This variance-based [pooling pressure](#pooling-pressure-risk)[^425] is
a consequence of singular [difficulty](#Difficulty) as required by
[consensus rules](#Consensus_Rules). **Small miners must compete at high
difficulty despite low hash power, which magnifies inherent variance.**
The [proximity premium](#proximity-premium-flaw)[^426] is the other
pooling pressure caused by [consensus](#Consensus).

The [defense](#axiom-of-resistance)[^427] that Bitcoin *intends* to
raise is market defense against anti-market ([state](#State)) forces. To
do this [hash power](#Hash_Power) must be distributed broadly among
[people](#Person) so that it becomes difficult to [co-opt](#Co_option).
However pooling pressures inherent in the [consensus](#Consensus) work
against this objective. As such the characteristic is termed a flaw,
though no way to eliminate the flaw has been discovered.

## Zero Sum Property

Bitcoin [mining](#Mine) is a [zero sum
game](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero-sum_game)[^428]. On average the
[chain](#Chain) grows by one [block](#Block) every 10 minutes, with the
full [reward](#Reward) controlled by its [miner](#Miner). Miners compete
to achieve this reward and will, apart from [pooling
pressures](#pooling-pressure-risk)[^429], each average a number of
rewards proportional to [hash rate](#Hash_Rate)*.* The difference
between a miner's cost and this reward over time is the
[interest](#Interest) on capital [invested](#Lend) in the mine.

There are two aspects of the zero sum property:

-   For the time period between [organizations](#Organization) one miner
    earns a reward and all other miners earn no reward. Neither price,
    hash rate, [difficulty](#Difficulty), [inflation](#Inflation),
    [fees](#Fee), nor anything else has any effect on this property.

-   The magnitude of rewards, in either [coin](#Coin) [units](#Unit) or
    [exchange](#Exchange) [price](#Price), has no effect on the rate of
    return on capital.

Idealized Bitcoin mining is a [closed
system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Closed_system)[^430]. Return on
capital varies relative to other mines, due to the [proximity
premium](#proximity-premium-flaw)[^431] and [variance
discount](#_Variance_Discount_Flaw)[^432] protocol flaws, as well as
[economies of
scale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economies_of_scale)[^433] and
operator efficiency. **Yet because these only impact the relative cost
of hash power, the proportionality of return rates is affected, not
overall returns.**

Actual Bitcoin is not a closed system. The [market](#Market) and
anti-market pooling pressures of [variation](#Variation) and
[distortion](#Distortion) (respectively) are external. Fundamentally
Bitcoin exists to defend markets, necessarily pitting distortion against
variation (or lack thereof).

When a distortion is applied to a miner in this zero sum system, all
other miners are affected. For example, a
[subsidy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subsidy)[^434] (not to be
confused with a [consensus](#Consensus) [subsidy](#Subsidy)) to one
miner acts as a tax on all others, and a tax on one miner acts as a
subsidy to all others. The subsidized miner operates at a lower cost for
the same hash rate, or has a higher effective hash rate (i.e. [hash
power](#Hash_Power)) for the same cost. The taxed miner operates at a
higher cost for the same hash rate, or has a lower effective hash rate
for the same cost.

![](media/image66.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

A subsidizer expects no return on capital, otherwise he/she would be
considered an investor. Investment is a market force whereby the miner
pays a market price for capital. With a higher effective rate of return
the subsidized miner attracts more capital than other miners, continuing
to expand hash power until there is a [majority hash
power](#Majority_Hash_Power) [miner](#Miner). The subsidizer's objective
is ultimately *control* over the subsidized mine.

A tax on mining has the effect of moving hash power to untaxed mines,
beyond the reach of the taxing authority, as capital seeks market
returns. If applied broadly, this can give the authority control through
its own mining operation. In other words, the authority can suppress
competition. This can also be accomplished through a 100% tax, whereby
the authority [co-opts](#Co_option) mines. The effect is the same, the
taxed miner is put out of business, and the proceeds of the tax are
applied to control.

The consequences of zero sum mining with inherent pooling pressure are
explored in [Threat Level Paradox](#threat-level-paradox)[^435].

# Alternatives

## Bitcoin Labels

Bitcoin has since its inception [defied clear
definition](http://gavinandresen.ninja/a-definition-of-bitcoin)[^436].
This is a consequence of the heavily overloaded use of the term. The
term was coined by Satoshi in [Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash
System[^437],](https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf) as a label for the
essential concepts. It was later used also for the prototype
implementation, a [chain](#Chain) (history) of
[transaction](#Transaction) [confirmation](#Confirmation), a set of
[consensus rules](#Consensus_Rules) that constrain a chain, a
[unit](#Unit) of the [coin](#Coin), and a vaguely-bounded community of
[people](#Person).

While there is only one set of concepts, each of the other contexts has
any number of possible variations consistent with them. There are many
implementations (of the prototype and otherwise), consensus rules have
deviated (in the prototype and in other implementations), history is
dynamic and arbitrary (even the prototype-encoded [genesis](#Genesis)
[block](#Block) could have been different without consequence), and each
coin manifests an independent set of units and is supported by its own
set of adherents.

For these reasons Bitcoin is used herein as a label for [Cryptodynamic
Principles](#cryptodynamic-principles)[^438]. Implementations are
referred to by their [brands](#brand-arrogation)[^439], such as
"[Bitcoin Core](https://bitcoin.org/en/bitcoin-core)"[^440] or
"[Libbitcoin](https://libbitcoin.info)"[^441]; chains are referred to by
the trading symbols in common use, such as "BTC" and "LTC"; consensus
rules for a given chain are referred to in the context of the trading
symbol, such as "LTC consensus rules"; a unit of coin is referred to in
the lower case of the trading symbol, such as "btc" or "ltc" (a
refinement of the ambiguous convention of using lower case "bitcoin" to
refer to a unit of "BTC"); and communities are referred to as either
"Bitcoin community" (generally) or "BTC community" (specifically).

While [maximalists](#maximalism-definition)[^442] may reject the use
"Bitcoin" as a conceptual label, associating it instead with a history,
**the term was coined in relation to a set of principles and continues
to apply to them.** Furthermore there are multiple instances of
independent chains that adhere to those principles, making the
history-based label ambiguous. Due to this ambiguity people have
naturally adopted the convention of referring to histories unambiguously
by way of trading symbols.

## Blockchain Fallacy

There is a theory that property [ownership](#Owner) can be secured by
immutable [claim-keeping](#Claimant), both against claim loss and
[Custodial Risk](#custodial-risk-principle)[^443].

Given that a claim is not itself the property, control of the property
rests with the [custodian](#Custodian) against whom the claim is made. A
custodian has the ability to surrender or retain the property and is
therefore a [trusted third
party](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trusted_third_party)[^444].
Abrogation of a claim by its custodian is always mitigated by custodian
signature, cryptographic or otherwise, with enforcement of the claim
left to its holder.

The theory asserts that immutable claim-keeping provides security
against loss of the claim by its owner, as nobody else would have an
interest in the loss. However, in order to redeem the claim its owner
must produce proof of ownership to the custodian. This requires that the
owner not lose the secret that proves this ownership. As such the
security of the claim against loss is not mitigated at all, it merely
changes form. The theory is therefore invalid on the basis of loss
prevention.

Storing a strong reference to the claim can reduce the size, and
therefore cost, of its immutable storage. The claim may be in the form
of a [human](#Person) or [machine](#Machine) [contract](#Contract), and
referenced as a [one way
hash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptographic_hash_function)[^445].
In either case the [validation](#Validation) and execution of the
contract is required for property transfer by the custodian. Therefore a
referenced contract claim compounds loss risk with additional data, the
contract.

As shown in [Risk Sharing Principle](#risk-sharing-principle)[^446],
people are always the basis of security. People may act collectively to
protect the immutability of a money, and therefore any claim data
associated with control of the money.

However, a custodian is a trusted third party. Immutable claims do not
in any way mitigate direct attacks against, or by, a custodian. Where
the custodian is the [state](#State) or is subject to its control, the
claim offers no
[security](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Executive_Order_6102)[^447]
against the substitution of state authority in place of proven ownership
of any claim. The theory is therefore also invalid on the basis of
custodial failure.

Bitcoin as a [money](#money-taxonomy)[^448] is non-custodial. Its
[units](#Unit) do not represent an asset held by a trusted third party.
The money is traded directly between customer and [merchant](#Merchant).
In this sense *all merchants* are custodians of Bitcoin's
[value](#Value). **The blockchain fallacy arises from a misconception of
the Bitcoin security model, attributing security to its technology as
opposed to its distribution of merchants.** The term "blockchain
technology" reinforces this error, implying that it is primarily the
structure of Bitcoin's data that secures it.

## Brand Arrogation

Bitcoin is a set of [essential
concepts](#cryptodynamic-principles)[^449], not a [chain](#Chain). No
[person](#Person) can control the concepts. People will use it to
describe one or more chains and [splits](#Split) as they evolve. This
happens with all [monies](#money-taxonomy)[^450], including gold and oil
which trade at different purities and qualities.

![](media/image68.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

This is consistent with the declaration of
[Bitcoin](https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf)[^451], as it binds a set of
concepts, not a set of [rules](#Rule), [protocols](#Proof_Of_Stake), or
[implementations](#Implementation). **People with capital invested have
an inherent desire for brand association, but there is no such thing as
a "legitimate" claim to it.**

## Consolidation Principle

The need to [exchange](#Exchange) from one [coin](#Coin) in order to
[trade](#Trade) with [merchants](#Merchant) of another is a cost. This
cost must be non-zero even if automated, as it must consume space and/or
time. As such one coin is always "better" (higher [utility](#Utility))
than two, to the extent that the resulting coin does not become
[fee](#Fee) bound as implied by the [utility
threshold](#utility-threshold-property)[^452].

![](media/image70.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

We can reasonably assume that two distinct
[monies](#_Money_Taxonomy_1)[^453] cannot perpetually have identical
utility. [Thiers'
Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gresham%27s_law#Reverse_of_Gresham's_law_(Thiers'_law))[^454]
discusses the consequences of better money in the absence of
[state](#State) controls. From this we necessarily conclude that **the
better of the two monies will eventually replace the other** in the
absence of state controls. As this occurs utility accrues to the
surviving coin in the reverse of the manner detailed in [Fragmentation
Principle](#_Fragmentation_Principle)[^455].

This does not imply that new coins cannot be created or exist over a
significant amount of time. It implies that there is a [market](#Market)
pressure toward a single coin. A better money in one situation may not
be a better or even useful money in another.

For example, gold is not a useful money for electronic
[transfer](#Transfer) and bitcoin is not very useful without a network.
One money replaces another in the scenarios for which the former is
better.

## Dumping Fallacy

There is a theory that selling [units](#Unit) from one side of a
[split](#Split) [coin](#Coin) for units of the other reduces the
relative [utility](#Utility) of the "sold" coin. However each party is
selling (and buying). As a [trade](#Trade) the action is symmetrical and
therefore the theory is invalid.

![](media/image72.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

There is a related theory that [exchanging](#Exchange) units from one
side of a split coin constitutes
[dumping](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dumping_(pricing_policy))[^456]
of that coin, which reduces its utility. **The theory simply
misrepresents the concept of dumping.** Dumping is [state](#State)
[subsidy](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subsidy)[^457] (not to be
confused with Bitcoin [subsidy](#Subsidy)) of a product sold in another
state. It is a levy on the taxpayers of the subsidizing state, typically
applied to establish [market](#Market) share for the product. In the
case where demand is
[elastic](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Price_elasticity_of_demand)[^458],
the subsidy increases sales volume for the product by reducing
[price](#Price) relative to the otherwise market price. The lower price
increases demand, by capturing buyers with lower [marginal
utility](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marginal_utility)[^459] for the
product, until the market clears. In contrast to dumping, trading at
market price doesn't reduce price because it is not subsidized.

Finally, there is a related theory that reduction of
[hoarding](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hoarding_(economics))[^460]
generally reduces exchange prices of the hoarded property. This is
[true](https://mises.org/blog/problem-hoarding)[^461], however a
[transfer](#Transfer) is not a reduction to hoarding levels unless the
buyer of the hoarded property subsequently hoards it less than the
seller. It is an error to assume this is the case.

## Fragmentation Principle

The [utility](#Utility) of a [money](#money-taxonomy)[^462] derives
directly from its ability to facilitate [trade](#Trade), in contrast to
[barter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barter)[^463]. If it is not
accepted by *any* [merchant](#Merchant) then objectively it has no
monetary usefulness. The more [goods and
services](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goods_and_services)[^464]
(including consideration of location) that can be purchased with a money
at any given time, the more likely it is that the money represents
greater utility to any given [person](#Person).

A [split](#Split) implies that zero or more merchants have stopped
accepting the original [coin](#Coin) and that zero or more have started
accepting the split coin. A "clean" split is a hypothetical scenario in
which there is no overlap in merchant acceptance of the two coins, and
no change in the set of merchants. A clean split produces two
[economies](#Economy) from the original set of merchants.

![](media/image74.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

If we assume that the coins are identical apart from the fact of the
split, the [Consolidation Principle](#consolidation-principle)[^465]
implies that the utility of the combined coins is the same as the
utility of the original less the [exchange](#Exchange) cost. The
scenario can be expanded to include merchant overlap. This has no effect
on coin utility, as it only shifts the incidence of the exchange cost
from buyer to seller.

An increase or decrease in the number of merchants accepting either of
the coins is a net gain or loss of combined utility respectively, as it
implies the removal or addition of a currency exchange cost. In other
words the effect is proportional to each of the coins in the split. This
factor relates to the particulars of a given split, not to splitting in
general.

Therefore a split produces both a shift and reduction of utility, in
proportion to the relative sizes of the resulting economies. The
[Network Effect Fallacy](#network-effect-fallacy)[^466] explains why the
reduction is not quadratic in nature, as sometimes assumed.

**While it may appear that in the shift someone has "taken" value from
the original coin, that value has actually "left" to form the split
coin.** In other words merchants are masters of the value that they
provide to a money. Owners have independent influence over purchasing
power, based on their [level of hoarding](#dumping-fallacy)[^467].
However this affects unit [price](#Price), not utility.

Upon the split an original unit becomes two units, each with decreased
and proportional utility in relation to the original. With bidirectional
mandatory [replay protection](#replay-protection-fallacy)[^468] each can
be [spent](#Spend) at no additional cost. Otherwise the need for
self-protection
[discounts](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Net_present_value)[^469]
units of the unprotected chain(s).

This analysis is applicable to new coins as well. The difference in the
case of a new coin is that original (other) coin units are not spendable
on the new chain. As such the new coin is faced with the difficulty of
allocating units, which requires work and therefore time. Splits
[bootstrap](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bootstrapping)[^470] this
process by subdividing the utility of an existing chain, to the extent
its merchants are willing to do so.

## Genetic Purity Fallacy

There is a theory that a [coin](#Coin) is strongest when all
[validation](#Validation) is performed by a common
[implementation](#Implementation). According to this theory the
complexity of [consensus rule](#Consensus_Rules) implementation implies
a likelihood that multiple implementations will diverge, resulting an
inadvertent [chain](#Chain) [split](#Split)*.* The split implies
financial loss by [people](#Person) on the weaker side. In addition to
divergence, a single implementation risks a global [stall](#Stall) of
the network. The threat of financial loss implies lower
[utility](#Utility) and therefore system security.

Based on the presumption of high complexity, each update to the "one
true client" produces the same likelihood of divergence. Similarly,
dependency on external independently updated libraries has the same
effect. In other words *it is not possible for there to be just one
implementation*. In the case of the initial Bitcoin implementation both
[upgrade of the
client](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0050.mediawiki)[^471]
and [upgrade of an external
dependency](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0066.mediawiki)[^472]
have resulted in unintended chain splits and [material financial
loss](https://cointelegraph.com/news/miners-lost-over-50000-from-the-bitcoin-hardfork-last-weekend)[^473].
Additionally,
[zero-day](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero-day_(computing))[^474]
flaws in this implementation have been [published without
notice](https://www.reddit.com/r/btc/comments/6z827o/chris_jeffrey_jj_discloses_bitcoin_attack_vector/)[^475]
and could have produced a global stall.

**A single implementation would produce a weakness directly analogous to
that of a living species with genetic uniformity.** In the case of a
single implementation, both internal and external updates penetrate the
[economy](#Economy) quickly and deeply. The financial impact of a split
is therefore more significant than that caused by a less widely deployed
implementation. In a scenario where ten implementations each supporting
an even fraction of the economy there would be risk to at most 10% of
the economy for any given update, whereas the update of a single
universally deployed implementation reaches the maximum split risk of
50%. The theory is therefore not only invalid but expresses the opposite
of actual behavior.

![](media/image76.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

## Hybrid Mining Fallacy

There is a theory that a combination of [proof-of-work](#Proof_Of_Work)
(PoW) and proof-of-stake (PoS) [mining](#Mine) offers a higher level of
system security than PoW. The theory implies that a majority of
[coin](#Coin) [owners](#Owner) can mitigate "misbehavior" by PoW miners.

In the absence of a [majority hash power](#Majority_Hash_Power)
[miner](#Miner)*,* there is nothing to mitigate. Therefore the theory is
premised on increasing the cost of a [censorship](#Censorship) regime.
This rests on the unsupportable assumption that PoW miners are not also
PoS miners.

The cost of hybrid mining is the combined costs of [work](#Work) and
staking, inclusive of capital cost. The return on mining
[investment](#Lend) necessarily equates to capital cost, as a
consequence of competition. As mining is profitable, capital cost does
not contribute to security. **Achieving majority stake is no more costly
than achieving majority hash power.** The theory is therefore invalid.

Given a model whereby a majority stakeholder can prevent confirmation of
otherwise [valid](#Validity) PoW blocks, once a majority is achieved the
censor [cannot be unseated](#proof-of-stake-fallacy)[^476]. Such a
system is fundamentally a PoS coin, lacking [censorship
resistance](#censorship-resistance-property)[^477], with the PoW aspect
providing no additional security.

## Maximalism Definition

**Maximalism is a public relations effort to discourage the formation of
substitutes for a given coin.** To the extent this is successful it may
benefit existing [owners](#Owner) by restricting supply and subsequently
elevating [price](#Price). However as [people](#Person) fail to find
close [substitutes](#substitution-principle)[^478], activity moves to
more distant ones. In the case of electronic payments this is generally
[state](#State) money.

Maximalism is distinct from [shitcoin](#_Shitcoin_Definition) awareness
in that it is characterized by promotion of one Bitcoin over all others.
Proponents often express the contradictory theory that no other coin
could be competitive with their preferred coin. If this were the case
there would be no reason to advocate for a single coin.

## Network Effect Fallacy

There is a theory that the [utility](#Utility) created by an
[economy](#Economy) varies with the square of the number of its
[merchants](#Merchant), assuming each merchant offers the same value of
goods or services for sale in the one [coin](#Coin). The theory is an
application of [Metcalfe's
Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metcalfe%27s_law)[^479].

This implies that an even [split](#Split) of the economy reduces
combined utility by half. For example, if 20 merchants has utility 400
then 2 networks of 10 of these merchants has utility 200.

However, the ability to [exchange](#Exchange) any [units](#Unit) of one
coin for the other collapses the utility of the two economies into a
hybrid economy. Due to the [conversion
cost](#consolidation-principle)[^480] **the hybrid coin has lower
utility than would a single, but this cannot be comparable to loss of
one of the two entirely unless the conversion cost is unbounded.** The
theory is therefore invalid.

## Proof of Cost Fallacy

In a competitive (free) [market](#Market), Bitcoin [mining](#Mine)
consumes in cost to the [miner](#Miner) what it creates in
[value](#Value) to the miner, both in the issuance of new [units](#Unit)
and in the service of [confirmation](#Confirmation). This is the case
whether a mined [block](#Block) [reward](#Reward) reflects the miner's
full return or otherwise.

The amount of computation performed in mining is probabilistically
reflected in the block [difficulty](#Difficulty). This computation is
referred to as [work](#Work). A [valid](#Validity) block header is
probabilistic [proof](#Proof) that this work was performed. This is the
basis of the term "proof of work".

The amount of energy consumed in block production is not provable,
either specifically or probabilistically. Energy efficiency varies. A
block header does not reflect "proof of energy" consumed. Such claims
are approximations.

A miner's return on block production is not fully reflected by the
block. The mining of one's own [transactions](#Transaction) implies
[fees](#Fee) not necessarily reflected in the block, as do [side
fees](#side-fee-fallacy)[^481] generally. A miner may introduce
transactions with arbitrarily high or low fees. The block reward does
not represent a "proof of reward". Such claims are assumptions.

In a free market, the return on mining is the value of its reward,
whether or not the amount is reflected in the block, and the fees earned
are determined by demand to transact. This is a consequence of
competition. So in this case it is correct to consider a valid block
header to be "proof of cost", however the amount of the cost remains
unknown. All that is knowable is that the miner earned a market rate of
return on capital.

However, in the case of [state](#State)
[monopoly](https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/pp/1054)[^482],
[price](#Price) is not controlled by competition. A monopoly may charge
any price that the market will bear. The enforcement cost of monopoly is
paid by the taxpayer. The price premium is another tax, paid by the
consumer. The value of the tax is transferred to the monopoly.

In the case of state-sponsored Bitcoin [censorship](#Censorship), both
enforcement and price (fee) premium exist as taxes in the manner of
monopoly. The fee level may exceed a market rate, and its enforcement is
subsidized by taxes. Monopoly mining can produce
[seigniorage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^483] just as
any monopoly money. The block header continues to provide a proof of
work, but no longer provides a proof of market cost.

In the same manner, the existence of a valid unit of [monopoly
money](#money-taxonomy)[^484] provides sufficient proof of a real
production cost, but provides no proof that the issuer did not earn a
monopoly premium on this cost. There is a theory that Bitcoin's
production cost is "unforgeable", where seigniorage of state money
represents "cost forgery". As has been shown, **Bitcoin is also subject
to seigniorage**, invalidating the theory.

All goods have real production cost. Monopoly exists to raise price
above cost. While Bitcoin is [censorship
resistant](#censorship-resistance-property)[^485], the effectiveness of
resistance is [not guaranteed](#axiom-of-resistance)[^486].

## Proof of Memory FaÃ§ade

It has been [proposed](https://eprint.iacr.org/2017/893.pdf)[^487] that
a [proof-of-memory](#Proof_of_Memory) (PoM) can replace some fraction of
the [proof-of-work](#Proof_Of_Work) (PoW) energy cost with hardware,
even relying on existing memory devices. As shown in [Energy Waste
Fallacy](#energy-waste-fallacy)[^488], a constant level of security
requires a constant ongoing expenditure. Therefore such a system would
require a comparable level of hardware consumption to offset any
reduction in energy cost. **In other words total energy consumption
cannot be reduced, it can only be transferred to hardware manufacture,
operation and disposal.**

In December 2017 the estimated annualized cost of energy consumed in
Bitcoin mining was \$1,628,000,000, based on the approximations of 32.56
terawatt hours consumed at an average \$.05 per kilowatt hour energy
cost. Contemporaneously this cost level equates to the consumption of
32,560,000 terabyte drives at an average price of \$50 per drive.
Utilization of existing underutilized memory reduces the unit cost and
therefore comparably increases the size requirement.

It is worth considering the economic behavior of a theoretical system in
which PoM is determined by an existing (cost free) fixed pool of memory
with no expiration or operational costs. As the cost of [mining](#Mine)
is zero, rewards flow at no expense in proportion to memory (assuming no
[pooling pressures](#pooling-pressure-risk)[^489]). Any increase in
average fee increases this reward for memory. Capital [invested](#Lend)
is zero and therefore rate of [interest](#Interest) is perpetually
infinite. Despite unbounded incentive, the assumption of zero expansion
precludes competition. But since the proof is externalized, competition
cannot actually be restricted. In an actual system hardware manufacture
expands perpetually for a given [fee](#Fee) level, and this expansion
accelerates with fee level increases.

Proof-of-memory is equal to proof-of-work in terms of resource
consumption and there is no reason to assume a reduced energy component
of that cost. The hardware acts as a proof battery, representing energy
provably consumed in its manufacture. This is a faÃ§ade analogous to the
"zero emission" battery-powered car.

## Proof of Stake Fallacy

[Confirmation](\l) security requires a [person](#Person) of authority to
order [transactions](#Transaction). Bitcoin periodically assigns this
authority to the [miner](#Miner) who produces the greatest
[proof](#Proof) of [work](#Work). All forms of work
[necessarily](#proof-of-memory-faÃ§ade)[^490] reduce to [energy
consumption](#energy-waste-fallacy)[^491]. It is
[essential](#censorship-resistance-property)[^492] that such proof be
independent of the [chain](#Chain) history. We can refer to this as
"external" proof.

The only other source of ordering authority is therefore dependent upon
chain history, which we can refer to as "internal". There is a theory
that such
[proof-of-stake](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proof-of-stake) (PoS)
constitutes a comparable alternative to [proof-of-work](#Proof_Of_Work)
(PoW) in terms of confirmation security. It is true that both PoS and
PoW delegate control over transaction ordering to a person in control of
the largest pool of certain capital.

![](media/image78.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

The distinction is in the deployability of the capital. PoW excludes
capital that cannot be converted to work, while PoS excludes capital
that cannot acquire [units](#Unit) of the [coin](#Coin). This difference
has a material consequence for security.

In [Other Means Principle](#other-means-principle)[^493] it is shown
that [censorship](#Censorship) resistance depends on people paying
miners to [overpower](#Power) the censor. **Overcoming censorship is not
possible in a PoS system, as the censor has acquired majority stake and
cannot be unseated.** As such PoS systems are not censorship-resistant
and the theory is therefore invalid.

## Replay Protection Fallacy

There is a theory that replay protection applied in a split
[chain](#Chain) increases the relative [utility](#Utility) of the
original chain. Replay protection is a [rule](#Rule) designed relative
to another chain and with a directional behavior. The protection makes
[transactions](#Transaction) of the protected chain [invalid](#Validity)
on the other.

Even without protection it is possible for an [owner](#Owner) to
[spend](#Spend) in a manner that prevents replay in one direction or the
other, though there is a fee and/or complexity cost in doing so. A split
may reduce, but not eliminate, this cost in one or both directions by
[activating](#glossary-of-terms) rules that [spends](#Spend) can
selectively utilize. This is called opt-in, in contrast to mandatory,
replay protection. Opt-in replay protection reduces but does not
eliminate the cost whereas mandatory protection can eliminate the cost.

The replay of a spend onto another chain is
[non-dilutive](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stock_dilution)[^494].
The common [output](#Output) can be spent on either chain with or
without replay. **The only distinction provided by protection is that
spends can always be distinct on each chain with no extra cost to the
spender.** The [supply](#Supply) in each chain remains unaffected by
protection.

It is a curious misperception that one chain can somehow absorb the
transactions of another in a split. All outputs of the common
[segment](#Segment) remain spendable on both chains. Replay protection
only reduces the cost of spending them on the protected chain.

One might assume that the lack of protection makes an owner less likely
to spend on the unprotected chain, thereby limiting supply and
increasing [exchange](#Exchange) [price](#Price). However this assumes
demand is unaffected by what amounts to an increase in [trading](#Trade)
cost. If the owner is not trading because of an increased cost in doing
so, then the utility of the coin is not increased but decreased.

The self-protection cost amounts to a one-time
[demurrage](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demurrage)[^495] that
persists until protection is applied to unprotected [units](#Unit),
intentionally or otherwise. This cost is a
[discount](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Net_present_value)[^496] to
the utility of an unprotected chain in relation to the hypothetical same
chain with protection. This implies *greater* utility of a protected
chain relative to the unprotected chain against which it is split than
would otherwise be the case. Therefore the theory is invalid.

## Shitcoin Definition

A shitcoin is any system that is not [cryptodynamically
secure](#cryptodynamic-principles)[^497] yet purports to capture the
[value proposition](#value-proposition)[^498] of Bitcoin.

Shitcoins are presumed to be scams, though it remains possible for
proponents be to well-intentioned yet ignorant of cryptodynamic
principles. By way of example,
[proof-of-stake](#proof-of-stake-fallacy)[^499] technologies are
shitcoins.

**While there may be implementations of Bitcoin that are more secure
than others, these are matters of degree.** No Bitcoin can be shown to
be [absolutely secure](#axiom-of-resistance)[^500]. As such the term is
not reasonably applied to any Bitcoin. By way of example,
[proof-of-memory](#proof-of-memory-faÃ§ade)[^501] technologies may not be
shitcoins (despite failure to achieve central objectives).

## Split Credit Expansion Fallacy

There is a theory that the increase of monetary [units](#Unit), as in
the case of a [split](#Split) or new [coin](#Coin), creates credit. This
is an error that is presumably a consequence of assuming that [credit
expansion](#credit-expansion-fallacy)[^502] driven by [state](#State)
monetary expansion is a [market](#Market) force. This assumption fails
to consider that [market money](#_Money_Taxonomy_1)[^503] cannot produce
[seigniorage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^504].

Seigniorage is a tax. The created monetary units do not represent new
capital but instead the dilution of existing units by the state,
transferring ownership of the capital that they represent to the
sovereign. As this capital is put to use in the subsidy of
[lending](#Lend) by the [state banking](#state-banking-principle)[^505]
cartel, as [discounted money](https://www.frbdiscountwindow.org)[^506]
and [insurance](https://www.fdic.gov/resources/deposit-insurance)[^507],
the cost of capital to the bank's customers is reduced.

**This so-called credit expansion is not simply the result of fractional
banking as a market force, it is the consequence of the state favoring
debtors at the expense of savers.** In a free market of banking, banks
are simply *investment funds*. Investors on average obtain a market
return on capital and suffer the risk of doing so. In state banking,
risk, and therefore capital, are rearranged according to
[political](#Political) objectives.

[Market](#Market) credit expansion is an increase in the lending of
capital, as opposed to its [hoarding](#Hoard). Increased rates of
lending are a consequence of reduced [time
preference](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_preference)[^508], and
reduce the cost of capital. It is impossible to show that creation of a
split or new coin (or anything else) reduces time preference. As such it
is an error to assume that these creations either increase the
availability of capital or reduce its cost.

## Split Speculator Dilemma

In the wake of a [split](#Split) an original [coin](#Coin)
[owner](#Owner) is faced with the choice of retaining or selling
[units](#Unit) of the original and split [chains](#Split).

As discussed in [Dumping Fallacy](#dumping-fallacy)[^509] there is no
way to discourage the existence of one chain or the other by
[exchanging](#Exchange) or
[hoarding](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hoarding_(economics))[^510]
units of either. Therefore we consider this choice to be strictly a
question of how to maximize the value of existing holdings following a
split.

Given a position before the split, an owner is impacted by the increased
cost of unit conversion, and [replay
protection](#replay-protection-fallacy)[^511] as applicable. These are
unavoidable future [trading](#Trade) costs that reduce the [net present
value](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Net_present_value)[^512] of the
units. Therefore these factors are not relevant to the question.

The remaining considerations *assume* that the combined coins will
increase in [price](#Price) over the contemplated period of time.

Under the assumptions of the [Consolidation
Principle](#consolidation-principle)[^513] two similar coins will
eventually consolidate, reducing to zero the value of one of them over
time. If one happens to know which this will be, it is rational to sell
it and buy the other. However, given that one may *not* know which coin
will survive, there is a chance that the trade would sell the coin that
succeeds for the one that fails, sacrificing *all* value in the original
units. **With no knowledge of the future, selling all or part of one for
the other increases the potential reward in proportion to the increased
risk.** As such it is equally rational to hoard both, which preserves
the assumptions that existed prior to the split.

Finally it should be emphasized that both chains could fail, with value
consolidating to an independent chain, commodity, or *state* money. This
topic intends only to provide a rational decision framework based on
assumptions that may not come to pass.

# Economics

## Credit Expansion Fallacy

Credit expansion is the multiplication of credit against
[money](#_Money_Taxonomy_1)[^514], resulting from lending. When a loan
is issued the lender and borrower both appear to hold the same money.
Due to the apparent
[inflationary](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation)[^515]
nature of credit expansion, it is commonly treated as an adverse effect
on [people](#Person) holding the money. Because banks are the most
visible lenders this effect is often attributed to banking itself. There
is a theory that Bitcoin can eliminate the effects of [fractional
banking](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fractional-reserve_banking)[^516]
and thereby eliminate credit expansion.

Saving encompasses [hoarding](#Hoard) and [investing](#Lend). Hoarding
implies ongoing [depreciation](#depreciation-principle)[^517], which is
actual consumption. Investing is lending to production, and implies no
depreciation as products must exist before they can depreciate.
Investment includes both debt and equity contracts as the distinction is
strictly financial, having [no economic
significance](https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/996)[^518].

![](media/image80.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

The distinction between hoarding and investment is essential to the
understanding of credit expansion. Hoarded money is under the control of
its owner, as if in a vault, buried in the back yard, or stuffed in a
mattress.

This is inherent in the meaning of ownership. The lender of money is not
the owner of the money, even though a loan is considered savings.

A lender requires liquidity to operate, and as such must hoard a certain
fraction of savings. When a loan is created the borrower owns the amount
lent. The borrower also requires liquidity, and so hoards a certain
fraction of the loan. Any remainder of the loan is necessarily invested.
This implies that the borrower has become a lender. The process
continues until all capital that exists is hoarded.

![](media/image82.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

The amount hoarded is sometimes referred to as the owner's "reserve",
but properly it is the owner's hoard, a fraction of that owner's total
savings. This use of the word reserve should not be confused with its
use in the state money context of [reserve
currency](#reserve-currency-fallacy)[^519] (i.e. [foreign exchange
reserves](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign-exchange_reserves)[^520]).
The term "fractional reserve banking" is a reference to the ratio of a
bank's hoard to its issued credit (money accounts).

The total amount of [U.S. Dollars in
circulation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_supply#United_States)[^521]
is referred to as "M0". This includes all tangible currency ("vault
cash") plus intangible bank balances in Federal Reserve accounts. These
two forms are considered interchangeable [obligations of the
Fed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_supply#Money_creation_by_commercial_banks)[^522].
The intangible obligations are money that is accounted for but [not yet
printed](#state-banking-principle)[^523]. As [reported by the
Fed](https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h3/current/default.htm)[^524],
the total of U.S. Dollars is:

  Dollars            Amount (2019)
  ------------------ ---------------------
  Tangible           \$1,738,984,000,000
  Intangible         \$1,535,857,000,000
  Total Money (M0)   \$3,274,841,000,000

M0 plus all bank account money is referred to as "M3". This is no longer
published by the Fed, but is
[estimated](https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/MABMM301USM189S)[^525] at
\$17,682,335,000,000. The total amount of credit extended in U.S.
Dollars can be estimated from the sum of Dollar-denominated money
[accounts](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bank_account)[^526],
[bonds](https://www.forbes.com/sites/kevinmcpartland/2018/10/11/understanding-us-bond-market/)[^527],
[public
equities](https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/cm.mkt.lcap.cd)[^528] and
[private
equities](https://www.quora.com/What-is-the-estimated-total-value-of-all-US-private-companies)[^529].

  Dollar Credit    Amount (2019)
  ---------------- ----------------------
  Bank (M3-M0)     \$14,407,494,000,000
  Bond             \$41,000,000,000,000
  Public Equity    \$32,891,169,631,125
  Private Equity   \$6,426,333,525,358

From the table:

-   The total ratio of money to credit is \~3.46%, or credit expansion
    of 29.9 x money.

-   Bank
    [reserves](https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h3/current/default.htm)[^530]
    of \$1,400,949,000,000 indicate a bank reserve ratio of \~11.11%
    against bank credit, or credit expansion of 9.0 x money. This is
    slightly above the [required
    reserve](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reserve_requirement)[^531]
    ratio, which is [no more than
    10%](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reserve_requirement#United_States)[^532].

-   Reserve of remaining money (i.e. excluding bank reserves) relative
    to bond and equity markets (i.e. the ratio of M0 minus bank reserves
    to the sum of bonds and equity) is \~2.08%, or credit expansion of
    48.0 x money.

**Eliminating credit expansion requires elimination of credit, and
therefore production.** All credit is subject to default. However the
theory holds that bank credit is different in the presumption of being
"risk free". This presumption arises from the fact of [taxpayer
insurance](https://www.fdic.gov)[^533] of the credit. This is not a
consequence of banking but of state intervention in banking. To the
extent the presumption is attributed to [free
banking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_banking)[^534], the theory
is invalid. All classes of business are subject to failure, and in doing
so free banking eliminates this misperception.

The distinction between a [money market
fund](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_market_fund)[^535] (MMF) and a
[money market
account](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_market_account)[^536] (MMA)
is informative. Both are intended to maintain a one-to-one equivalence
with money, yet both are discounted against money due to
[settlement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Settlement)[^537] and risk
costs (e.g. some people accept only money, rejecting the higher costs of
[credit card](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Credit_card)[^538] and
[cheque](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cheque)[^539] transactions). The
distinction (apart from taxpayer insurance of the latter) is in the
treatment of investment risk and of insufficient reserve.

In the case of a MMF, investment failure is reflected in unit pricing.
While the fund attempts to maintain sufficient [net asset
value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Net_asset_value)[^540] (NAV) to
allow exchange a unit of the fund for one of the money, a sufficient
drop in NAV will be reflected in unit price. In the case of an MMA, such
losses are absorbed by money reserves. If there is insufficient reserve,
either because of an unexpected level of withdrawal, or because of
investment losses, the MMA fails. Failure of an MMA manifests as a [bank
run](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bank_run)[^541], where some people
are repaid and others not. Insufficient NAV of a MMF manifests as a
uniform drop in unit price.

The advantage of the MMA is that its units are more
[fungible](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fungibility)[^542], though
still discounted against money. The advantage of the MMF is that losses
are evenly spread. It is not surprising therefore that MMAs are
typically insured by the taxpayer, more tightly regulated by the state,
and accounted for as bank credit. It is rare for a MMF to "[break the
buck](https://www.investopedia.com/articles/mutualfund/08/money-market-break-buck.asp)"[^543]
but of course it can and does happen. Bank failures also happen but are
hidden by taxpayer insurance.

Bank credit is not truly fungible. This can be seen in everyday use of
credit cards and cheques. There is a material risk of failure to settle
associated with each. While this risk is generally attributed to the
account holder (e.g. in the case of an MMA), it is a non-distinction to
the person accepting the credit. One might imagine therefore that the
acceptance of credit cards and cheques against MMFs to be treated
similarly. The credit would circulate as a money-equivalent while more
evenly distributing risk across those who are benefiting from its
investment return. Free banking has the option to adopt either model to
whatever extent people desire, but in any case credit will expand
against money, risk will exist, and [money
substitutes](https://wiki.mises.org/wiki/Money_substitutes)[^544] will
exist.

The decision to [hoard vs. invest](#_Savings_Relation)[^545] is based
strictly on each person's [time
preference](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_preference)[^546] Time
preference is not derivable from any condition. It is, as the name
implies, a human preference. Human preferences change and therefore so
does time preference. Time preference determines the economic
[interest](#Interest) rate which can also be considered the cost of
capital. An increase in the cost of capital resulting from increasing
time preference causes credit available to contract, and a decrease has
the opposite effect. With infinite time preference all capital would be
hoarded for consumption, ending all production.

It matters not whether a lender is referred to as a "bank", all
investment implies the same behavior. If banks operated with a 100%
hoard they would not be lenders. This does not imply any reduction in
lending, as the [rate of lending](#_Unlendable_Money_Fallacy)[^547] is
determined by time preference alone. Bitcoin can be lent and does
nothing to limit credit expansion. The theory is therefore invalid.

Eliminating credit expansion is equivalent to the condition of infinite
time preference, an infinite interest rate, no capital available for
production, and no products available for consumption. In states where
credit is limited or prohibited by statute
([usury](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usury)[^548] laws), investment
moves to equity instruments, [loan
sharking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loan_shark)[^549], or an end to
production.

## Depreciation Principle

Ownership of a product moves from producer to consumer (or producer),
yet neither [production nor
consumption](#production-and-consumption)[^550] occurs at that time. The
producer [hoards](#Hoard) the product before the [trade](#Trade) and the
consumer hoards it after. The product exists and is eventually traded
between [people](#Person). The terms "producer" and "consumer" are names
for the *objectives* (production and leisure) of the two primary
economic actors. The producer *intends* to create (appreciate) capital,
while the consumer intends to destroy (depreciate) it. A producer who
only [owns](#Owner) does not produce and a consumer who does not own
does not consume. But the producer's hoard (inventory) depreciates the
product just as does the consumer's.

The common use of the term "consumption" conflates [interest](#Interest)
and
[depreciation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Depreciation_(economics))[^551].
The fact of a product sale represents interest to the investor, not
depreciation of the product. The depreciation of a product is *actual*
consumption, and represents either the extraction of [service to its
owner](https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/974)[^552]
([utility](#Utility)) or
[waste](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waste)[^553]. Waste is
depreciation on which the [owner](#Owner) places no [value](#Value).
Only destruction reflects actual consumption just as only creation
reflects actual production. Only *action* is economically meaningful,
the name of a given role is not. The net proceeds of a sale from
producer to consumer is interest, even if it is capitalized through
reinvestment.

Wealth, defined as capital accumulated, is the sum of products. All
products are always hoarded and depreciating. Production creates
products, where interest is both the cost of, and return on, doing so.
The price of a product is the sum of its interest return on investment
and the cost of all products consumed in its production. Any product
incorporated into a new product component is fully depreciated as an
independent product and appreciated in the new product. Given that the
sum of production costs equates to [investment
principal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bond_(finance)#Principal)[^554],
the net increase in products is simply interest.

The rate of growth in wealth is the difference between the interest rate
and the depreciation rate.

> growth-rate = interest-rate - depreciation-rate

The following examples demonstrate the effect of depreciation on growth:

> growth-rate = interest-rate - depreciation-rate\
> 5% = 10% - 5%\
> -10% = 10% - 20%

The depreciation rate is always positive, as all property depreciates.

> depreciation-rate \> 0\
> interest-rate - growth-rate = depreciation-rate\
> interest-rate - growth-rate \> 0\
> interest-rate \> growth-rate

**All property exhibits depreciation, which implies economic interest is
always greater than economic growth.**

The economic interest rate can be observed over time as the return on
capital invested.[^555]

> Investors expect returns of 10.2% with millennials hoping for more.\
> \
> *Shroders: Global Investor Study*

The depreciation rate can be derived from observed interest and capital
growth rates.[^556]

> Global growth in 2019 has been downgraded to 2.6 percent, \[\...\]
> reflecting weaker-than expected international trade and investment at
> the start of the year. Growth is projected to gradually rise to 2.8
> percent by 2021.\
> \
> *World Bank: Global Economic Prospects*

In this case an interest rate of 10.2% is offset by 7.6% depreciation to
obtain 2.6% growth.

> depreciation-rate = interest-rate - growth-rate depreciation-rate\
> 10.2% - 2.6% = 7.6%

This is consistent with estimates of capital depreciation. While
buildings and machinery have low rates of depreciation, vehicles, office
equipment and food stocks (for example) have much higher.[^557]

> For the period 1960-2000, the three estimates for machinery and
> equipment are 5.61%, 5.42%, and 5.68%. For buildings, the estimates
> 3.36%, 3.43%, and 3.43%.\
> \
> *OECD: Estimating Depreciation Rates*

To the extent [money](#_Money_Taxonomy_1)[^558] exhibits [use
value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Use_value)[^559], it depreciates as
any [good](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goods)[^560]. Fiat money, such
as Bitcoin or the U.S. Dollar, is presumed to have no use value. A pure
money exhibits no growth due to the [opportunity
cost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost)[^561] of interest
foregone. In other words, interest is the capture of time value and
money depreciation includes the failure to capture that value.

> pure-money-growth-rate = interest-rate - interest-rate\
> 9% - 9% = 0%

All actual money value also depreciates due to
[demurrage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demurrage_(currency))[^562].

> commodity-money-growth-rate = pure-money-growth-rate - demurrage-rate\
> 0% - 1% = -1%

Growth rates of
[inflationary](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation)[^563]
and deflationary money are shown in [Unlendable Money
Fallacy](#_Unlendable_Money_Fallacy)[^564].

## Expression Principle

Human actions should not be conflated with goods. The failure to
distinguish between the two, at the most fundamental level, leads to
errors of [significant
consequence](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Labor_theory_of_value)[^565].
Actions are fundamentally human preferences given expression through
goods, which are the objects of that expression. Without expression, a
preference is merely a thought and a good provides no service.
[Catallactics](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catallactics)[^566]
concerns itself with expressed preferences, specifically
[production](#production-and-consumption)[^567], [trade](#Trade), and
[consumption](#depreciation-principle)[^568].

The human spirit is the actor ([person](#Person)). It has preferences
that it expresses by motivating the body over which it has control
([owns](#Owner)). This body is its property, a good. When its body is
fully depreciated (dead), the spirit ceases to be an actor. It is not
necessary to contemplate disembodied spirits, as no action is implied.

Catallactics is not concerned with legal, theological, or ethical
concepts of humanity. The [Turing
Test](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turing_test)[^569] is sufficient
criteria for the definition of humanity. The catallactic distinction is
in the formation of preferences, independent of any other actor. A
person in this sense is a decision-maker, as distinct from a
rule-follower. A [machine](#Machine) is a good that expresses the
preferences of a person. A person expresses its preferences by
motivating its machine.

A spirit cannot be property, and a body is the property of its spirit.
Only the spirit controls the body, where control defines ownership.
Where the spirit is compelled to act through the
[aggression](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-aggression_principle)[^570]
of another actor, the preference is not independent. The preference
expressed (action) is that of the aggressor.

Catallactics considers only the consequences of independent actors. When
a person suffers theft, the thief's preference is expressed, not his
own. When a person pays a tax, he is presumed to be expressing the
preference of another person, as tax is involuntary by nature. Slavery
implies expression of the slaver's preferences, not those of the slave.
The substitution of one's preference for that of another is involuntary
trade (theft).

It is sometimes argued that time is valuable because life is temporary.
This is not the basis of [time
preference](#time-preference-fallacy)[^571]. The impermanence of a
person is of no consequence to catallactics. A person may live forever
yet is still presumed to exhibit a preference for goods sooner than
later. Infinite life does not imply no desire to consume.

**Action is the expression of human preference through goods.**
Processes directed by humans are action, processes directed by machines
are goods. In other words, production/[labor](#labor-and-leisure)[^572],
trade/theft, and leisure/waste are actions, while websites, assembly
lines, and cars are goods.

## Full Reserve Fallacy

There is a theory that [fractional
reserve](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fractional-reserve_banking)[^573]
banking is a fraud, allowing banks to create
[money](#money-taxonomy)[^574] "[out of thin
air](#thin-air-fallacy)"[^575]. The theory implies that honest banking
must be [full
reserve](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Full-reserve_banking)[^576].

This theory hinges on the definition of the word "bank".
[Rothbard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Murray_Rothbard)[^577] makes
the above argument in [*Man, Economy, and
State*](https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html)[^578],
but explicitly limits his definition of a
[bank](https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/pp/1086)[^579]
to that of a "warehouse" for money:

> When a man deposits goods at a warehouse, he is given a receipt and
> pays the owner of the warehouse a certain sum for the service of
> storage. He still retains ownership of the property; the owner of the
> warehouse is simply guarding it for him. When the warehouse receipt is
> presented, the owner is obligated to restore the good deposited. A
> warehouse specializing in money is known as a "bank."\
> \
> *Murray Rothbard: Man, Economy, and State*

Banks do offer this warehousing service, in the name of [safe
deposit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Safe_deposit_box)[^580]. But
banks are not so narrowly defined. They also generally offer
interest-bearing accounts such as [saving
deposit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Savings_account)[^581] and [term
deposit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_deposit)[^582]. Rothbard
uses the expectation of [interest](#Interest) to differentiate
warehousing money from [lending](#Lend) it:

> Someone else's property is taken by the warehouse and used for its own
> money-making purposes. It is not borrowed, since no interest is paid
> for the use of the money.

In other words, his call for full reserve does not apply to
interest-bearing accounts. However he neglects to point out that
interest earned on the money represented by deposits can legitimately
offset otherwise necessary account fees.

Banks often offer [demand
deposit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transaction_account)[^583] (e.g.
checking) accounts without interest. The fact of positive yield on the
account is not the demarcation between warehousing and lending, even by
his own definition. Where a bank account yields 5% at a fee rate of 6%,
no distinction from 0% yield with a 1% fee rate exists. The distinction
is the contractual agreement between the depositor and the bank.

> Since it is convenient to transfer paper in exchange rather than carry
> gold, money warehouses (or banks) that build up public confidence will
> find that few people redeem their certificates.

Money certificates representing warehoused money are [representative
money](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representative_money)[^584], a form
of [money
substitute](https://wiki.mises.org/wiki/Money_substitutes)[^585]. In the
United States, [state
banks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/State_bank)[^586] and others
formerly issued such certificates. These were eventually replaced by
[central bank](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_bank)[^587] issued
[gold
certificates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_certificate)[^588] and
[silver
certificates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silver_certificate)[^589].

> The banks will be particularly subject to the temptation to commit
> fraud and issue pseudo money certificates to circulate side by side
> with genuine money certificates as acceptable money-substitutes. The
> fact that money is a homogeneous good means that people do not care
> whether the money they redeem is the original money they deposited.
> This makes bank frauds easier to accomplish.

To the extent that central bank certificates ever represented all of the
warehoused money (e.g. gold and silver), they eventually followed the
course described by Rothbard.

As the sum of certificates became too large to support redeemability,
they were abrogated and [people](#Person) were
[compelled](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_Reserve_Act)[^590] to
convert them to fiat. These large scale frauds occurred in the lifetimes
of both Rothbard and his precursor [von
Mises](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ludwig_von_Mises)[^591], and were
perpetrated by state and central banks under the protection of statute
(i.e. the state).

**The theory does not limit its condemnation of banking to warehousing
(safe deposit) fraud, it extends to honest lending of deposits by banks
generally, including demand deposit, saving deposit and often term
deposit.** As such the theory is invalid. Furthermore it implies a
condemnation of lending and investing generally. And as Rothbard himself
[points
out](https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/996)[^592],
lending is indistinct from investing:

> Whether saved capital is channeled into investments via stocks or via
> loans is unimportant. The only difference is in the legal
> technicalities. Indeed, even the legal difference between the creditor
> and the owner is a negligible one.

All lending originates from a person's accumulated capital, whether
deposited in bank or otherwise. There is no source for lending other
than savings deposited. There is a [related
theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jes%C3%BAs_Huerta_de_Soto#Austrian_business_cycle_and_full_reserve_banking)[^593]
that people are too stupid to understand contractual terms of deposit.

> Huerta de Soto considers the possibility "that a certain group of bank
> customers (or for the sake of argument, all of them) enter into a
> deposit contract aware and fully accepting that banks will invest (or
> loan, etc.) a large portion of the money they deposit". In this case,
> argues Huerta de Soto, "the supposed authorization from the depositors
> lacks legal validity" because few lay-persons understand the
> instability inherent in fractional-reserve banking: they believe their
> deposit is guaranteed, which Huerta de Soto considers a (near
> universal) misconception.\
> \
> *Wikipedia: JesÃºs Huerta de Soto*

Yet those who make this argument believe themselves able to understand
it. As such the theory is invalid. Given the moral distinction of
[nonaggression](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-aggression_principle)[^594],
it is the right of every individual to contract with another
voluntarily. Taking this right away would be the crime. References to
the "unbanked" generally assume that vast numbers of people do not have
"access" to banking services. This is generally not the case; banking is
widely available all over the world. These are the people who
[understand the
risks](https://www.reuters.com/article/zimbabwe-crisis-cbank/zimbabwe-c-bank-says-raided-private-bank-accounts-idUSLK23553320090420)[^595]
and chose not to take them.

A related theory is that money substitutes trade at the same value as
the money, representing a fraud. To the extent that money substitutes
(e.g. deposit accounts) are [insured by the
taxpayer](https://www.fdic.gov/)[^596], the discount against the money
they substitute is lower. However, even given full insurance, it is an
error to assume these trade at par with the money. Money substitutes
manifest as deposit accounts and are generally transacted
electronically.
[Settling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Settlement_(finance))[^597]
money accounts incurs time, money and risk costs. Credit card and cheque
fraud is
[rampant](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Credit_card_fraud)[^598], and
this cost is surfaced in all transaction and account fees. Settling can
take [days](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cheque_clearing)[^599] if not
[months](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chargeback)[^600]. Merchants
necessarily [discount money
substitutes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Merchant_account#Discount_rates)[^601]
against money. Even electronic transfer directly between banks incurs a
[material settlement cost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fedwire)[^602]:

> Banks are charged a gross transfer fee of \$0.82 for every
> transaction, however there is a three-tiered discount schedule, which
> results in actual transaction fees costing between \$0.034 and \$0.82
> per transaction depending on transaction volume.\
> \
> *Wikipedia: Fedwire*

This is why many business are "cash only", others do not accept cheques,
others charge a premium to offset the discount, and why there are [ATM
fees](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ATM_usage_fees)[^603], etc. As such
the observation that money substitutes are not discounted is refuted by
a mountain of evidence to the contrary. More importantly, this discount
is provably necessary, invalidating the theory.

A related theory is that bank lending creates [price
inflation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflation)[^604] as a
consequence of [credit expansion](#credit-expansion-fallacy)[^605].
Given that lending and money have necessarily evolved together, there is
never a time where credit expansion itself changes the level of money
substitutes. This requires either an expansion of the [money
supply](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_mining)[^606], or a reduction
[in time preference](#time-preference-fallacy)[^607], reflected as the
economic rate of interest. Credit expansion is strictly a function of
these two factors, not lending itself. As such the theory is invalid.

A related theory is that banks may legitimately lend only "their own"
money. All capital lent is someone's savings. If anyone can run a bank
(i.e. borrow against their own savings and lend it to others) then this
is a distinction without a difference. Aggregating savings with other
people (i.e. through bank deposits) does not create any meaningful
distinction. As such the theory is invalid.

A related theory is that banks may legitimately lend only against time
deposits. There is no economic distinction between a time deposit and a
demand deposit, as both imply fractional reserve. The nature of deposit,
even safe deposit, implies that time and other constraints (e.g.
identification) are required for withdrawal. Even taxpayer-insured
checking and savings accounts are [effectively time
deposits](https://www.chase.com/content/dam/chasecom/en/checking/documents/deposit_account_agreement.pdf)[^608]:

> For all savings accounts and all personal interest-bearing checking
> accounts, we reserve the right to require seven days' prior written
> notice of withdrawal.\
> \
> *Chase Bank: Deposit Agreement*

Default risk and credit expansion remain despite maturity matching. As
such the theory is invalid. The only true demand deposit is no deposit
at all (money), and of course people have this option and that of time
deposit to the extent they prefer it.

A related theory is that banks may legitimately lend only against
fully-insured deposits. However the only true [risk free
return](#risk-free-return-fallacy)[^609] is no return. This is why only
taxpayers insure loans (i.e. through compulsion). Full insurance is
economically equivalent to no lending whatsoever, making the theory a
contradiction, and therefore invalid.

A related theory is that even [free
banking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_banking)[^610] has an
inherent ability to create money "[out of thin
air](#thin-air-fallacy)"[^611]. Yet if this is true then anyone can do
so, since free banking confers no special powers on people who refer to
themselves as banks. If money can be created at no cost, it cannot be
property. As such the theory is invalid. Even state fiat incurs a
[production
cost](https://www.federalreserve.gov/faqs/currency_12771.htm)[^612], a
cost to maintain its [monopoly on
production](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Counterfeit)[^613], and a
[political
cost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crisis_in_Venezuela)[^614] of
[monetary
inflation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation)[^615]. Free
banking, such as with Gold or Bitcoin, enjoys no
[seigniorage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^616]
privilege, due to the nature of competition.

Finally, it is often the case that people advocating for full reserve
lending are the same people advocating for lower time preferences. This
is a direct contradiction, as the former implies infinite time
preference.

## Inflation Principle

A [money](#_Money_Taxonomy_1)[^617] is
[presumed](https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/1107)[^618]
to change in [purchasing
power](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Purchasing_power)[^619] in
proportion to the demand for goods that it represents. In other words,
with twice the amount of money each [unit](#Unit) of the money will
[trade](#Trade) for half its previous amount of goods, as the increase
in goods implies lower demand for them. This is a [proportional
relationship](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proportionality_(mathematics))[^620]
between [monetary
inflation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation)[^621] and
[price inflation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflation)[^622] (or
deflation). This [money
relation](https://mises.org/library/human-action-0/html/pp/778)[^623] is
an expression of the [law of supply and
demand](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Supply_and_demand)[^624].

-   Rising supply market money, such as Gold and *early* Bitcoin,
    consumes the same [value](#Value) in goods as it creates in new
    units -- including the [opportunity
    cost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost)[^625] of the
    capital [invested](#Lend) in doing so. As such it produces no change
    in proportionality and therefore no price inflation.

-   Monopoly money is not subject to competitive production, allowing
    its producer to obtain a
    [monopoly](https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/pp/1054)[^626]
    premium in the pricing of new units. As such it increases the
    proportion of money to goods, resulting in price inflation.

-   Fixed supply market money, such as late Bitcoin, creates no units.
    As such the proportion of money to goods decreases with economic
    growth, resulting in [price
    deflation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deflation)[^627].

Proportionality refers to the goods "represented" by a money. If there
was only one money, this would be a straightforward relation to all
goods. However the relation must be addressed in the case of multiple
monies. The goods represented by a money are those that it can be traded
for. In other words, the relation implies demand for goods in the money.

Yet demand does not remain constant in the case of a decision to mine.
New demand for goods is created by the fact of mining. The miner must
consume "representation" goods in producing the money. The new money is
entirely offset by the demand increase represented by the consumed goods
and the opportunity cost (i.e. fewer new goods) of employing them in
mining. Therefore proportionality is preserved in the case of multiple
monies as well. **Economic growth is not price-inflationary in a free
market.**

In expanding upon the
[Copernican](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nicolaus_Copernicus)[^628]
[quantity theory of
money](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantity_theory_of_money)[^629],
[Richard
Cantillon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Cantillon)[^630]
formulated a theory now known as the [Cantillon
Effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Cantillon#Monetary_theory)[^631].
The theory is valid when applied to monopoly monies, but has no
relevance to market money -- a fact that seems to have escaped
economists since Cantillon. The basis of the distortions explained by
Cantillon is
[seigniorage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^632], not
money production. Market production of money, just as market production
of all things, is not only [neutral in real
effects](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neutrality_of_money)[^633] but
also [price](#Price) neutral.

In [*Human
Action*](https://mises.org/library/human-action-0/html)[^634], [Ludwig
von Mises](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ludwig_von_Mises)[^635], as his
predecessors, [attempts to
demonstrate](https://mises.org/library/human-action-0/html/pp/778)[^636]
the validity of the Cantillon Effect to *any* money.

> Changes in the supply of money must necessarily alter the disposition
> of vendible goods as owned by various individuals and firms. The
> quantity of money available in the whole market system cannot increase
> or decrease otherwise than by first increasing or decreasing the cash
> holdings of certain individual members.\
> \
> *Ludwig von Mises: Human Action*

This statement asserts that new money first effects existing money
holdings. Yet this is not the case with market money. Its creation
coincidentally *reduces goods holdings* as it *increases money
holdings*. The increased demand for money is concurrently and
proportionately offset by its increased supply. This reduction of goods
cannot be ignored in evaluation of the money relation. The statement
conflates market money with monopoly money, as the latter does not
consume its value in goods through production. To the extent the goods
are consumed in essentially the same location as money is produced, and
at the same time, not even an uneven distribution of the money relation
is implied. This error persists despite explicit recognition that mining
consumes in goods the value that it produces in new money.

> The fact that the owners of gold mines rely upon steady yearly
> proceeds from their gold production does not cancel the newly mined
> gold's impression upon prices. The owners of the mines take from the
> market, in exchange for the gold produced, the goods and services
> required for their mining \[\...\]. If they had not produced this
> amount of gold, prices would not have been affected by it.

Taken literally the last sentence is a
[tautology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tautology_(logic))[^637] (no
creation implies no price effect from the creation). From the context it
is clear Mises intends that, had the gold not been produced, prices
would be unchanged. Yet without a change to the money supply, had the
goods been consumed in other
[production](#production-and-consumption)[^638], the implied economic
growth would *decrease* prices; and if the goods had been consumed in
[leisure](#labor-and-leisure)[^639], the implied economic contraction
would *increase* prices. In other words, the above conclusion is
perfectly reversed. The money relation is *preserved* because of money
production and would change due to lack thereof. This error then infects
dependent theories.

> As against this reasoning one must first of all observe that within a
> progressing economy in which population figures are increasing and the
> division of labor and its corollary, industrial specialization, are
> perfected, there prevails a tendency toward an increase in the demand
> for money. Additional people appear on the scene and want to establish
> cash holdings. The extent of economic self-sufficiency, i.e., of
> production for the household's own needs, shrinks and people become
> more dependent upon the market; this will, by and large, \[p. 415\]
> impel them to increase their holding of cash.

In other words, economic growth alone changes the money relation -- a
direct contradiction of the preceding statement.

> Thus the price-raising tendency emanating from what is called the
> "normal" gold production encounters a price-cutting tendency emanating
> from the increased demand for cash holding. However, these two
> opposite tendencies do not neutralize each other. Both processes take
> their own course, both result in a disarrangement of existing social
> conditions, making some people richer, some people poorer. Both affect
> the prices of various goods at different dates and to a different
> degree. It is true that the rise in the prices of some commodities
> caused by one of these processes can finally be compensated by the
> fall caused by the other process. It may happen that at the end some
> or many prices come back to their previous height. But this final
> result is not the outcome of an absence of movements provoked by
> changes in the money relation. It is rather the outcome of the joint
> effect of the coincidence of two processes independent of each other.

This is a refutation of the idea of money creation as a
"[stimulus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stimulus_(economics))"[^640]
to growth, which is correct. Yet it incorrectly assumes money demand and
money creation are independent processes. They are explicitly dependent
as expressed in the money relation and the law of supply and demand
which it echoes. The effect of unrelated interactions is perfectly
reversed in this argument, as it can only mask the money relation.
Stimulus is a reversal of cause and effect, properly refuted, yet it is
an error to both accept the money relation and reject it.

The underlying inflation error, like that of the [regression
theorem](#regression-fallacy)[^641], may arise from an understandable
desire to explain the [adverse
effects](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^642] of monopoly
money. Yet in the purely rational system of
[catallactics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catallactics)[^643], any
error in deduction produces inconsistency, which is evident in this
case. Market money is subject to monetary inflation, yet produces no
price inflation. Monopoly money is similarly subject to monetary
inflation, but produces price inflation -- solely due to the monopoly on
production. Mises overgeneralizes that *all* monetary inflation is price
inflationary.

> Prices also rise in the same way if \[\...\] the demand for money
> falls because of a general tendency toward a diminution of cash
> holdings. The money expended additionally by such a "dishoarding"
> brings about a tendency toward higher prices in the same way as that
> flowing from the gold mines \[\...\]. Conversely, prices drop when the
> supply of money falls \[when\] the demand for money increases (e.g.,
> through a tendency toward "hoarding," the keeping of greater cash
> balances).

All money is always [owned](#Owner) by someone. Under the above
assumption of no money creation, a greater "cash balance" for one
[person](#Person) implies a lesser for another. Increased money hoarding
implies only a decreased present demand for goods relative to
anticipated future demand. Decreased hoarding implies only increased
present demand for goods. It is not as if money has been sewn back into
the earth. There is no cost of "dishoarding" (trading the money), so
doing so is unlike money "flowing from the gold mines".

A generally increased level of hoarding gives the *impression* of
greater wealth, but this is illusory. In order to be of value to people
money must be traded for goods, at which point the illusion evaporates.
Unlike with mining, the effect of dishoarding is uneven. The first to do
so obtains the highest exchange value and the last the lowest. The
[speculative](#speculative-consumption)[^644] strategy of "[pump and
dump](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pump_and_dump)"[^645] is based on
exploiting this unevenness. Wealth is transferred, not created.

Furthermore, increased hoarding implies higher [time
preference](#time-preference-fallacy)[^646], which is the ratio of
hoarded capital to lent capital ([capital
ratio](#_Savings_Relation)[^647]), reflected as the
[interest](#Interest) rate. This is increased time cost, not increased
capital value. The same amount of goods exist (wealth) at the point
where hoarding increases. Yet this increase proportionally reduces
production, due to increased cost of capital. This creates a *permanent*
and compounding reduction in wealth, as the time lost in production is
never recovered even with subsequent dishoarding. If all money was
hoarded for a decade (assuming no reversion to barter), people may
dishoard only to find their money has lost significant value due to the
dramatic reduction in the amount of goods.

Independent of economic growth (or contraction), a change in demand for
a market money implies a proportional change in demand for, or supply
of, goods traded for the money, as opposed to another money or barter.
The supply of goods is the level to which the money is accepted in trade
for them. A money exhibits monetary value only in its ability be
directly or indirectly [exchanged](#Exchange) for things of [use
value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Use_value)[^648], as directly
implied by the money relation itself. The value of a money derives from
people willing to accept it in trade (i.e. the [economy](#Economy)).
Given the
[fungibility](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fungibility)[^649] of
money, [selling the money](#dumping-fallacy)[^650] to another person
implies no change to this acceptance.

To the extent it pertains to commodity money, this principle assumes
that the amount of goods required to produce the money remains constant.
The price of goods in the money is thereby held constant by the money
relation. However, where the value of goods required to produce a
commodity money increases or decreases, decrease or increase of prices
in the money is implied respectively. Therefore, independent of demand,
the money relation is controlled by the rate of change in necessary
production factors. Such changes are presumed to be unpredictable, as
otherwise they are already incorporated into price. As such this
constitutes speculative error.

## Labor and Leisure

Labor and leisure are complementary [human
actions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Action_axiom)[^651] that pertain
to [production and consumption](#production-and-consumption)[^652] of
[economic
goods](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goods_and_services)[^653]. Labor
is the process of consumption to produce an economic good (production).
Leisure is the process of consumption that does not produce an economic
good. Consumption without [utility](#Utility) is the process of
[waste](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waste)[^654]. According to [Murray
Rothbard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Murray_Rothbard)[^655], in his
[*Man, Economy and
State*](https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/926)[^656]:

> labor always involves the forgoing of leisure, a desirable good\
> \
> *Murray Rothbard: Man Economy and State*

This subtle error implies that both labor and leisure are economic
goods. Yet only [actions create or consume
goods](#expression-principle)[^657]. Labor (production of economic
goods) and leisure (production of non-economic goods) are human actions
that create and consume goods over time. In the most basic sense,
production implies the consumption of the actor's body, while
consumption implies its production.

> In each hour he will expend his effort toward producing that good
> whose marginal product is highest on his value scale. If he must give
> up an hour of labor, he will give up a unit of that good whose
> marginal utility is lowest on his value scale. At each point he will
> balance the utility of the product on his value scale against the
> disutility of further work. We know that a man's marginal utility of
> goods provided by effort will decline as his expenditure of effort
> increases. On the other hand, with each new expenditure of effort, the
> marginal disutility of the effort continues to increase. Therefore, a
> man will expend his labor as long as the marginal utility of the
> return exceeds the marginal disutility of the labor effort. A man will
> stop work when the marginal disutility of labor is greater than the
> marginal utility of the increased goods provided by the effort.\
> \
> Then, as his consumption of leisure increases, the marginal utility of
> leisure will decline, while the marginal utility of the goods forgone
> increases, until finally the utility of the marginal products forgone
> becomes greater than the marginal utility of leisure, and the actor
> will resume labor again.\
> \
> This analysis of the laws of labor effort has been deduced from the
> implications of the action axiom and the assumption of leisure as a
> consumers' good.

It is neither correct nor necessary to assume leisure is a good, and by
doing so imply that labor is an anti-good. It is similarly not necessary
to construct the artifice of negative utility ("disutility"). Value is
simply a preference for higher utility over lower utility. Both labor
and leisure produce goods of (positive) utility.

It is [time preference](#time-preference-fallacy)[^658] that implies
leisure utility is greater than labor utility. By properly accounting
for a person's body as property, "leisure preference" follows directly
from time preference. As the above quote implies, this is the result of
a [trade](#Trade) of time without one's body (labor time) for the amount
of [interest](#Interest) that offsets the value one attributes to time
with his body (leisure time).

Time, space and goods are the factors of all production, while labor is
the process of production. **Labor/leisure and production are distinct
names for the same human action.** The act of producing is labor or
leisure; the act of laboring or leisuring is production. The [Pure
Bank](#pure-bank)[^659] provides the model of all production. This cycle
is clearly evident in the case of self-employment, which is just the
example of production. In the case of a wage-earner there are two
producers, the employee and the employer.

A pure wage-earning employee obtains [borrowed](#Borrow) capital and
thereby trades for food, education, and equipment, as required for a
job. A fraction of his capital is [hoarded](#Hoard) and the rest is
[lent](#Lend) to the employer. The employer pays the employee
[interest](#Interest) (wages) for the term of this loan. The employee
recovers his depreciated principal and wage at the end of the job.

The wage rate offsets both time preference for the lent amount (nominal
interest rate) and principal depreciation during the term of the loan.
The amount of principal and interest, less depreciation of the fraction
reserved, is returned to the employee's creditor. In the case where his
capital investment is borrowed from his own hoard, the employee is his
own creditor. The return is then hoarded or reinvested in future labor
(or otherwise).

A real employer and employee each obtain a [market](#Market) rate of
interest. The employee's interest rate is his wage rate less his
production expense. The employer's interest rate is the [price](#Price)
obtained for the work product over the time of its production less his
production expense. The employer's production expense is the consumption
of his borrowed capital, [reserved](#reservation-principle)[^660] over
that time, just as for the employee. The amount by which interest
exceeds depreciation is the [increase in
wealth](#depreciation-principle)[^661] to both parties.

The interest rate obtained by both classes of production is the same.
The difference in amounts returned is strictly a function of the amount
of capital invested, either in individual production (employee) or in
managing collective production (employer). A person's maximum leisure
valuation can be inferred from the wage rate he accepts, by
[discounting](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Present_value)[^662] the
implied principal by the market interest rate.

> wage-rate = leisure-rate \* (1 + interest-rate +
> body-depreciation-rate)

The employee trades leisure time for labor time to the extent that he
values the amount of interest more than the value he attributes to
leisure time. Leisure preference is a restatement of time preference,
where one's own body is the economic good being lent to production in
exchange for interest.

Money wealth is generally lower at an early age, implying a higher money
time preference. Over time wealth accumulates and time preference
decreases. But the opposite is true with leisure preference. Money and
one's body are not the same property, and are not generally
exchangeable. At an early age, one has the lowest leisure preference. As
one's body depreciates with age, the amount of it declines despite money
wealth, increasing leisure preference. This may eventually require a
higher-than-market interest rate to offset the preference, resulting in
retirement. Money time preference and leisure preference affect each
other as they tend to move in opposite directions. To the extent that
the objective of labor is to increase wealth, less wealth decreases
leisure time preference and more increases it. This may also result in
retirement.

## Production and Consumption

Production and consumption are the complementary [human
actions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Action_axiom)[^663] of producing
and consuming [economic
goods](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goods_and_services)[^664]. The
human roles of producer and consumer [should not be
conflated](#depreciation-principle)[^665] with the acts of production
and consumption. A role refers to intent not action. All producers
consume and all consumers produce. Consumption that produces an economic
good is production, otherwise it is the process of either
[leisure](#labor-and-leisure)[^666] or
[waste](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waste)[^667].

The [Pure Bank](#pure-bank)[^668] provides the model of all production.
A pure producer has [borrowed](#Borrow) capital, consuming it in the
creation of a product. The consumed fraction at any time has been
[lent](#Lend) to production. The unconsumed fraction at any time has
been [reserved](#reserve-definition)[^669] for liquidity. The new
product is sold, obtaining [interest](#Interest) on the consumed
fraction, returned as
[dividend](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dividend)[^670]. The amount
of reserve is the same necessary productive expense as the Pure Bank's
liquidity reserve. **The reserve is only repopulated by more borrowed
capital, including dividend/earnings reinvestment.**

A real producer converts time and capital to interest, at the
[market](#Market) [price](#Price) of the product produced, just as a
real bank obtains interest at the market price. The bank is merely
obtaining the interest of another producer by being its investor. This
shows the fundamental equivalence of lending as debt and equity,
independent of *statutory* distinctions (tax).

A pure consumer hoards capital without any [lent](#Lend) to production.
All capital is borrowed and reserved. At 100% reserve there is no
interest, no return, and eventually full depreciation. In this case the
borrowed capital is considered a gift
([charity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charity_(practice))[^671]). A
real consumer is additionally subject to tax and subsidy, which
increases and decreases the rate of hoard depreciation respectively.

## Pure Bank

The concept of a Pure Bank can be useful in demonstrating
[lending](#Lend) behavior generally.

A Pure Bank provides only the following services:

-   borrows money (debt from creditors)

-   lends money (credit from debtors)

-   hoards money (reserve)

The material differences from a real bank are:

-   no state intervention (free bank)

-   no cost of operation (perfectly efficient)

The bank is owned by its creditors in proportion to their credit, as is
the case with any company. There are existing major banks that are owned
by their account holders, such as [USAA](https://www.usaa.com)[^672] and
[Vanguard](https://investor.vanguard.com)[^673], so this is not a
distinction from a real bank. Neither a Pure Bank nor a real bank has
"own capital" to lend, as all capital is borrowed from investors in one
form or another. The objective of creditors is to maximize their rate of
return. The objective of debtors is to minimize their
[interest](#Interest) expense.

Creditor accounts are [money
substitutes](https://wiki.mises.org/wiki/Money_substitutes)[^674]. This
aspect distinguishes the bank from an investment fund. The money
substitute may be either a [demand
deposit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demand_deposit)[^675] or a [money
market](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_market_fund)[^676]. The
distinction is in the allocation of insufficient reserve (negative rate
of return), with the former being "[first come, first
served](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bank_run)"[^677] and the latter
"[breaking the
buck](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_market_fund#Breaking_the_buck)"[^678].

The lack of state intervention is the common concept of [free
banking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_banking)[^679], where there
is no [statutory
control](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federal_Reserve)[^680], [state
insurance](https://www.fdic.gov)[^681], [discount
capital](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discount_window)[^682], or
[seigniorage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^683]. The bank
uses [commodity money](#money-taxonomy)[^684] unless otherwise
specified, which simplifies calculations by
[eliminating](#inflation-principle)[^685] the need to offset [price
inflation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflation)[^686] or [price
deflation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deflation)[^687].

Perfect efficiency differs from a real bank only in the rate of return,
as nothing is consumed in operations. All earning is a consequence of
[time preference](#time-preference-fallacy)[^688]. Uniform interest is
assumed, as rate
[arbitrage](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arbitrage)[^689] is an
expense.
[Demurrage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demurrage_(currency))[^690] is
the expense of storing money. The expense ratio (inclusive of demurrage)
is 1 for the Pure Bank.

[Reserved](#reserve-definition) capital is the money in which credit and
debt are
[settled](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Settlement_(finance))[^691]
(zero
[maturity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maturity_(finance))[^692]).
[Depreciation](#depreciation-principle)[^693] is the [opportunity
cost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost)[^694] of it not
being lent, also known as "cash drag". Interest relations assume a
single [compounding
period](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compound_interest)[^695] with the
rate of interest over that period. This presentation simplification is
inconsequential to implied relations.

Given the preceding definition of a Pure Bank, the following relations
are absolute.

> reserved = borrowed - lent\
> demurrage = demurrage-rate \* reserved\
> depreciation = interest-rate \* reserved\
> interest = interest-rate \* lent\
> return = expense-ratio \* interest

For the Pure Bank, the [reserve
ratio](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reserve_requirement)[^696] fully
determines [capital
ratio](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capital_requirement)[^697], [debt
ratio](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Debt_ratio)[^698], and savings
ratio.

Reserve Ratio

> reserve-ratio = reserved / borrowed\
> reserve-ratio = (borrowed - lent) / borrowed

Capital Ratio

> capital-ratio = reserved / lent\
> capital-ratio = (borrowed - lent) / lent

Debt Ratio

> debt-ratio = borrowed / reserved\
> debt-ratio = borrowed / (borrowed - lent)

Savings Ratio

> savings-ratio = lent / reserved\
> savings-ratio = lent / (borrowed - lent)

Balance Sheet

The Pure Bank has no liabilities, only shareholder equity.

  bank assets       shareholder equity
  ----------------- --------------------
  lent + reserved   borrowed

Rate of Return

Creditor rate of return is additionally a function of the interest rate.
The creditor's rate of return is less than the debtor's interest rate
due to cash drag, the necessary expense of demand withdrawal. To reduce
this expense, time constraints are typically included in [real bank
contracts](https://www.chase.com/content/dam/chasecom/en/checking/documents/deposit_account_agreement.pdf)[^699].
For example, by law any withdrawal from an interest-bearing U.S. bank
account can be delayed for seven days. The creditor can only eliminate
[cash
drag](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/performance_drag.asp)[^700]
by investing directly (i.e. without settlement assurances).

> return-rate = interest-rate \* lent / borrowed

As shown in [Savings Relation](#_Savings_Relation)[^701] individual
capital ratios fully determine the [market](#Market) interest rate. When
we consider every person operating as a pure bank, it becomes clear that
the capital ratio determines the interest rate. A capital ratio of 0%
for all people implies that capital is free and has no return. At
increasing capital ratios, the interest rate increases accordingly. At
full hoarding the cost of capital is "infinite" -- none can be obtained
for production.

The presumption of the [money relation[^702]](#inflation-principle) is
that price is proportional to the ratio of demand to supply. But as
shown in Savings Relation, supply and demand for capital exist in a
zero-sum relation. An increase in [hoarding](#Hoard) implies a
corresponding decrease in lending and the reverse implies an increase.
As such neither the capital ratio nor the interest rate is linear in
relation to change in the amount hoarded (or lent). This has led some to
search for a "[golden
ratio](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Golden_Rule_savings_rate)"[^703].
Yet given the subjectivity of value, this is ultimately an exercise in
futility.

Yet capital ratios fully determine the interest rate. As all people
individually attempt to obtain a golden ratio based on their own
preferences, the market rate of interest results. Substituting the
capital ratio for the interest rate demonstrates the effect of
reservation on the Pure Bank, under the additional assumption that
everyone operates as a Pure Bank and with the same capital ratio. The
capital ratio includes present goods depreciation, which for money is
demurrage. The Pure Bank demurrage ratio is 1, so this drops out.

> return-rate = (reserved \* demurrage-ratio / lent) \* (lent /
> borrowed)\
> return-rate = (reserved / borrowed) \* demurrage-ratio\
> return-rate = reserved / borrowed

The rate of return on Pure Bank investment becomes the reserve ratio.
This does not imply that an individual Pure Bank can set its own return
by setting its capital ratio. It merely reflects that the market capital
ratio determines the return on capital. If *all lenders* doubled their
present capital ratio their returns would necessarily double, as the
cost for capital, and therefore its return, would double.

Real Banks

The independent capital ratios of all people, based on individual time
preference, determine the market rate of interest. The above
substitution for the bank's own capital ratio as the interest rate seems
to imply that the bank is setting the interest rate. However this is
inherent in the concept of time preference. A bank can set any level of
interest it prefers. There is no assumption for real banks that the
market will oblige, so market interest and therefore market returns are
assumed.

> market-return-rate = market-interest-rate \* (lent / borrowed)\
> market-return-rate = market-capital-ratio \* (lent / borrowed)

The Free Bank also differs from the Pure Bank by operational expense,
which directly reduces rate of return.

> free-bank-return-rate = market-return-rate \* expense-ratio

The Real Bank only differs from the free bank by tax (inclusive of
regulatory expense), which directly reduces rate of return.

> real-return-rate = free-bank-return-rate \* tax-expense-ratio

The Central Bank (state) only differs from the real bank by taxpayer
subsidy (inclusive of discounted borrowing), which directly increases
rate of return.

> central-return-rate = real-bank-return-rate \* subsidy-income-ratio

Where tax includes seigniorage of the bank money, the [Fisher
Equation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fisher_equation)[^704] must be
applied above to translate the interest rate from a nominal rate to a
real rate. No other change is implied other than tax, which is accounted
for by the Real Bank above. This tax is generally the source of subsidy,
which is accounted for by the Central Bank above.

Every [person](#Person), or company of people, is a Real Bank, and the
[state](#State) is a Central Bank. A Real Bank produces the service of
liquid investment, an [economic
good](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goods)[^705]. The cost of production
is the depreciation of its reserve. This is the model of all production.

## Savings Relation

[Time preference](\l)[^706] is the
[catallactic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catallactics)[^707]
assumption of human preference for present goods over future goods. It
is well established that time preference is reflected as the
[interest](#Interest) rate. According to [Murray
Rothbard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Murray_Rothbard)[^708], in his
[*Man, Economy and
State*](https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/989)[^709]:

> The level of the pure rate of interest is determined by the market for
> the exchange of present goods against future goods, a market which we
> shall see permeates many parts of the economic system. \[\...\] Thus,
> if, on the time market, 100 ounces of gold exchange for the prospect
> of obtaining 105 ounces of gold one year from now, then the rate of
> interest is approximately 5 percent per annum. This is the
> time-discount rate of future to present money. \[\...\] The pure rate
> of interest will then be the going rate of time discount, the ratio of
> the price of present goods to that of future goods.\
> \
> *Murray Rothbard: Man Economy and State*

However, it is individual [capital
ratio](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capital_requirement)[^710] that
*determines* the interest rate. The interest ratio is that of future to
present good price. It is the [market](#Market) [price](#Price) premium
required to compensate an [owner](#Owner) for time without his good --
or the price of time. As with all prices, it is determined entirely by
individual preferences, in its case time preference,
[expressed](#expression-principle)[^711] as individual [trades](#Trade).

The time preference of an individual can be represented as the ratio of
the price of his [hoard](#Hoard) to that of his [lending](#Lend).
Together these amounts are his savings. In trading a fraction of his
hoard for its future value, one expresses that its future amount is
worth more to him than presently. Conversely, by not doing so one
expresses the opposite valuation.

A hoard is the opportunity to invest (lend) and an investment is the
opportunity to consume. One is traded for the other until no further
increase in value is obtained from doing so. By investing, one values
the future amount more than the present amount not invested. By not
investing, one values the present amount not invested more than the
future amount. If this were not the case there would be a lower or
higher level of investment respectively. This valuation, manifested as a
trade, is the expression of one's time preference.

> Perhaps more fallacies have been committed in discussions concerning
> the interest rate than in the treatment of any other aspect of
> economics. It took a long while for the crucial importance of time
> preference in the determination of the pure rate of interest to be
> realized in economics; it took even longer for economists to realize
> that time preference is the only determining factor. Reluctance to
> accept a monistic causal interpretation has plagued economics to this
> day.

The *individual* does not control the market interest rate. The
individual controls his capital ratio given the market interest rate.
The capital ratio is how individual time preference is *expressed*. The
interest rate is how those preferences are *priced* by the market.

The following [vertical bar
chart](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bar_chart) provides an example of
an individual's savings.

> Individual Capital Ratio (time preference)\
> \|\
> \|\
> 21 \[ \|\
> 20 \[ H \|\
> 19 \[ HH \|\
> \-\--\[\-\-\--+\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-- Market
> Interest (time price)\
> U 18 \[ HHH\|TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT\
> N 17 \[ HHH\|PTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT\
> I 16 \[ HHH\|PPTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT\
> T 15 \[ HHH\|PPPTTTTTTTTTTTTTT\
> 14 \[ HHH\|PPPPTTTTTTTTTTTTT\
> O 13 \[ HHH\|PPPPPTTTTTTTTTTTT\
> R 12 \[ HHH\|PPPPPPTTTTTTTTTTT\
> D 11 \[ HHH\|PPPPPPPTTTTTTTTTT\
> I 10 \[ HHH\|PPPPPPPPTTTTTTTTT\
> N 9 \[ HHH\|PPPPPPPPPTTTTTTTT\
> A 8 \[ HHH\|PPPPPPPPPPTTTTTTT\
> L 7 \[ HHH\|PPPPPPPPPPPTTTTTT\
> 6 \[ HHH\|PPPPPPPPPPPPTTTTT\
> V 5 \[ HHH\|PPPPPPPPPPPPPTTTT\
> A 4 \[ HHH\|PPPPPPPPPPPPPPTTT\
> L 3 \[ HHH\|PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPTT\
> U 2 \[ HHH\|PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPT\
> E 1 \[ HHH\|PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPP\
> =======================\
> abc\|defghijklmnopqrst\
> UNIT BY DESCENDING MARGINAL VALUE

Each ordinal increment represents a marginal value increment. Symbols H,
P, and T represent Hoard, Present and Time value increments
respectively. Hoarded value is the present value of a unit not lent.
Present value is that of a lent unit had it not been lent. Time value is
the expected net value (principal + interest) of the lent unit over a
period of time at the market interest rate for that period.

Each vertical bar on the horizontal axis represents one monetary unit,
yet each unit has a different marginal value to the [owner](#Owner), as
a consequence of [marginal
utility](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marginal_utility)[^712]. This
value is expressed on the vertical axis as bar height. One should not
conflate [value](#Value) with [price](#Price). The value of each owned
unit increases as the hoard decreases, and therefore the net value of
the same interest rate (price for [money](#money-taxonomy)), decreases
as the hoard decreases, until it becomes negative (where no more is
lent).

The individual's time preference is demonstrated by his valuation
between marginal units "c" (the next unit to potentially be lent) and
"d" (the last unit lent). The former's [present
value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Present_value)[^713] is higher than
can be offset by its potential [time
value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_value_of_money)[^714], so it
is not lent. The latter's present value is not, so it is lent. If the
market interest rate rises such that the increase in return on lending
"c" exceeds the cardinal value increment of "b" (i.e. chart cell "b19")
then "c" will be lent. If the market interest rate falls such that the
decrease in return on "d" exceeds "c18" then the loan of "d" will be
liquidated.

Total savings is 20 units (units "a" through "t"). Total hoarding is 3
units ("a" through "c"). Total lending is 17 units ("d" through "t").
The individual's capital ratio is therefore 3/17 (\~17.65%), represented
on the chart as a vertical line between units "c" and "d". The
[opportunity cost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost)[^715]
of the hoard is 3 units x the market interest rate. The return on the
lending is 17 units x the market interest rate.

It is important to note that since [value is
subjective](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value)[^716],
only the individual's valuation of the amount of interest is meaningful
in this context. The market rate of interest raises his ordinal
valuation of the units lent to between "18" and "19". The chart
therefore represents market interest as a horizontal line between those
increments.

Only the choice to lend or not lend expresses time preference.
Depreciation occurs in what is hoarded, not in what is lent. As shown in
the [Depreciation Principle](#depreciation-principle)[^717], hoarding is
consumption. The common perception that a trading from "producer" to
"consumer" constitutes consumption is a clear error. One can decrease
his rate of depreciation and thereby make his hoard last longer, **but
to be reflected as time preference one must change his rate of
lending.**

Notice that, relative to the previous chart, a decrease in the interest
rate by the value of the 18th ordinal increment implies that one less
unit is lent.

> Individual Capital Ratio (time preference)\
> \|\
> \|\
> 21 \[ \|\
> 20 \[ H \|\
> 19 \[ HH \|\
> 18 \[ HHH \|\
> U \-\--\[\-\-\-\--+\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-- Market
> Interest (time price)\
> N 17 \[ HHHH\|TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT\
> I 16 \[ HHHH\|PTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT\
> T 15 \[ HHHH\|PPTTTTTTTTTTTTTT\
> 14 \[ HHHH\|PPPTTTTTTTTTTTTT\
> O 13 \[ HHHH\|PPPPTTTTTTTTTTTT\
> R 12 \[ HHHH\|PPPPPTTTTTTTTTTT\
> D 11 \[ HHHH\|PPPPPPTTTTTTTTTT\
> I 10 \[ HHHH\|PPPPPPPTTTTTTTTT\
> N 9 \[ HHHH\|PPPPPPPPTTTTTTTT\
> A 8 \[ HHHH\|PPPPPPPPPTTTTTTT\
> L 7 \[ HHHH\|PPPPPPPPPPTTTTTT\
> 6 \[ HHHH\|PPPPPPPPPPPTTTTT\
> V 5 \[ HHHH\|PPPPPPPPPPPPTTTT\
> A 4 \[ HHHH\|PPPPPPPPPPPPPTTT\
> L 3 \[ HHHH\|PPPPPPPPPPPPPPTT\
> U 2 \[ HHHH\|PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPT\
> E 1 \[ HHHH\|PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPP\
> =======================\
> abcd\|efghijklmnopqrst\
> UNIT BY DESCENDING MARGINAL VALUE

This holds at every increment down to the level of interest in which the
individual does not lend.

> Individual Capital Ratio (time preference)\
> \|\
> \|\
> 21 \[ \|\
> 20 \[ H \|\
> 19 \[ HH \|\
> U 18 \[ HHH \|\
> N 17 \[ HHHH \|\
> I 16 \[ HHHHH \|\
> T 15 \[ HHHHHH \|\
> 14 \[ HHHHHHH \|\
> O 13 \[ HHHHHHHH \|\
> R 12 \[ HHHHHHHHH \|\
> D 11 \[ HHHHHHHHHH \|\
> I 10 \[ HHHHHHHHHHH \|\
> N 9 \[ HHHHHHHHHHHH \|\
> A 8 \[ HHHHHHHHHHHHH \|\
> L 7 \[ HHHHHHHHHHHHHH \|\
> 6 \[ HHHHHHHHHHHHHHH \|\
> V 5 \[ HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH \|\
> A 4 \[ HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH \|\
> L 3 \[ HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH \|\
> U 2 \[ HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH \|\
> E 1 \[ HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH\|\
> \-\--\[\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--+\-\-\-- Market
> Interest (time price)\
> =======================\
> abcdefghijklmnopqrst\|\
> UNIT BY DESCENDING MARGINAL VALUE

Similarly this relation holds to the point where the individual lends
all of his capital.

> Individual Capital Ratio (time preference)\
> \|\
> \|\
> \-\--\[-+\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-- Market
> Interest (time price)\
> 21 \[ \|TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT\
> 20 \[ \|PTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT\
> 19 \[ \|PPTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT\
> U 18 \[ \|PPPTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT\
> N 17 \[ \|PPPPTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT\
> I 16 \[ \|PPPPPTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT\
> T 15 \[ \|PPPPPPTTTTTTTTTTTTTT\
> 14 \[ \|PPPPPPPTTTTTTTTTTTTT\
> O 13 \[ \|PPPPPPPPTTTTTTTTTTTT\
> R 12 \[ \|PPPPPPPPPTTTTTTTTTTT\
> D 11 \[ \|PPPPPPPPPPTTTTTTTTTT\
> I 10 \[ \|PPPPPPPPPPPTTTTTTTTT\
> N 9 \[ \|PPPPPPPPPPPPTTTTTTTT\
> A 8 \[ \|PPPPPPPPPPPPPTTTTTTT\
> L 7 \[ \|PPPPPPPPPPPPPPTTTTTT\
> 6 \[ \|PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPTTTTT\
> V 5 \[ \|PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPTTTT\
> A 4 \[ \|PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPTTT\
> L 3 \[ \|PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPTT\
> U 2 \[ \|PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPT\
> E 1 \[ \|PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPP\
> =======================\
> \|abcdefghijklmnopqrst\
> UNIT BY DESCENDING MARGINAL VALUE

## Speculative Consumption

[Catallactics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catallactics)[^718] defines
two categories of capital use, consumption, and production. Products are
produced and consumed. Production, or the creation of products, requires
time and therefore saved capital (investment). Consumption also requires
time, and therefore saved capital (hoard).

Human energy can be expended in [leisure or
labor](https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/926)[^719],
where the depreciation of stored human energy is a factor (cost) of
production. In either case conversion of this [potential
energy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy)[^720] to
[work](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy#Work_and_potential_energy)[4](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy)[^721]
is a consumption of stored capital. Labor may produce food and the
[person](#Person) may immediately eat it. This is an absolute
[subsistence
economy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subsistence_economy)[^722], where
the only savings is potential energy stored in one's body. The product
of labor, time and
[nature-given](https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/939)[^723]
factors is continuously consumed, either in production (e.g. picking
berries) or leisure (e.g. sleep). This is sometimes referred to as
living "hand to mouth." The property saved in this process is the
person's own body. A child begins life with potential energy gifted by
its mother.

Savings is therefore the only source of both production and leisure. The
question then arises, to which is the savings applied? Even in the case
of food that has been digested, the question remains. Capital applied to
production is traded for the ownership of what is eventually produced.
This ownership of a future good is called a "savings-investment" (or
simply "investment"). Capital not applied to production is called a
"savings-hoard" (or simply "hoard"). Savings is the sum of one's hoarded
*and* invested capital. The process of applying hoarded capital to
investment or leisure is called
"[dishoarding](https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/992)"[^724].

> After he sells his services, he acquires his money income from
> production, thereby adding to his money stock. He then allocates this
> income between consumption and savings-investment, and we are assuming
> no hoarding or dishoarding.\
> \
> *Murray Rothbard: Man, Economy and State*

Catallactics deals with human *action*, explicitly rejecting analysis of
human *thoughts*. Thoughts are subjective, expressed objectively only in
the action of a [trade](#Trade). This principle is embodied in the
[theory of subjective
value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value)[^725].
As a necessary factor of both production and leisure, time is *assumed*
to have objective value. There is no expression of whether one's savings
is to be used in production or leisure until it is dishoarded. One may
prefer savings for production, but then oversleep, consuming the savings
in leisure. Similarly one may generally prefer apples, but trade an
apple for an orange. The only objective expression of a preference is a
trade, including the trade of savings for consumption by production or
leisure. As not applied to production, hoarded capital is called
"unproductive", just as is a person not engaged in production.

Hoarding is a necessary consequence of uncertainty. As uncertainty rises
people tend to increase their level of hoarding, either restricting
leisure or production. This allows their hoarded capital to be applied
to either in the future. Yet unproductive capital incurs time costs.
Time is objectively valuable. The opportunity to use the capital in
production has been traded for increased certainty. This is the
[opportunity cost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost)[^726]
of certainty, an expense. Both productive and unproductive uses of
capital trade opportunity for certainty. The hoard is referred to as
"liquidity" and is necessary only due to the fact of
[uncertainty](https://mises.org/wire/problem-hoarding)[^727].

As shown in [Savings Relation](#_Savings_Relation)[^728], the ratio of
savings hoarded to that invested is an expression of human [time
preference](#time-preference-fallacy)[^729]. As with all valuations,
that of certainty relative to opportunity cost is subjective. While time
has objective [utility](#Utility) (i.e. more time is worth more than
less), the value remains relative and subjective. Yet, as with all
valuations, the consequence is an objective [price](#Price) for capital
over time, expressed by [exchange](#Exchange) and referred to as the
rate of [interest](#Interest). Interest is both the return on capital
and the cost of capital. Opportunity cost is the loss of productive gain
that arises from hoarding capital, measured by the rate of interest.

A hoard represents the subjective valuation that it is worth more over
time than the opportunity cost that it represents over that time. This
is called "speculation". It is the expression of a preference for owning
a good over parting with it, with its cost measured by interest
foregone. The opportunity to invest the hoard over the time hoarded is
lost forever. In other words, the act of not investing capital is the
consumption of capital. With all capital hoarded, there is no production
of new capital and eventually all capital is consumed.

How the speculation is "justified" is not relevant to this distinction,
as value is subjective. Yet some level of hoarding is necessary due to
the fact of uncertainty (i.e. of the future). A preference for capital
in the present, as opposed to more in the future, is always expressed in
hoarding. One may certainly hoard at a level beyond the liquidity
intended to offset uncertainty. For example, one may hoard for the
entertainment value of [games of
chance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Game_of_chance)[^730]. The
opportunity cost in this case is an entertainment expense. One may hoard
while [timing a
sale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Market_timing)[^731]. The
opportunity cost of in this case is called "cash drag". It matters not
whether the person anticipates a net gain or realizes one, the hoard
necessarily represents an expense -- because time has value.

However, time preference is sometimes misinterpreted as a relation
between consumption and saving. This is often loosely described as
"deferred consumption" or "delayed gratification". Yet as has been
shown, hoarding is consumption. The consumption has not been deferred;
the gratification has not been delayed. Offsetting uncertainty is
gratification (peace of mind), entertainment is gratification (leisure
activity), the potential gain on successful market timing is
gratification (anticipation of better price). All of these consume
capital. The distinction made by the concept of time preference is in
the exchange of capital over time in exchange for interest. A
speculation makes no such trade.

All of a person's property (savings) is either hoarded or invested.
Hoarding erodes that property over time. Cars wear out, food gets
converted to energy, furniture wears out, capital decays. Money is no
different, it decays in a hoard due to both its [carry
cost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cost_of_carry)[^732] and its
opportunity cost. The [present
value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Present_value)[^733] of money is
always discounted against its future value. This is described as the
"time value of money". By expending the future value, the money hoard is
actually depreciating by the amount of the discount over the time
hoarded.

As shown in [Depreciation Principle](#depreciation-principle)[^734] the
act of purchasing goods is not consumption. There is no actual
consumption except to the extent that property depreciates. As such
there is no distinction between deferring the purchase of goods and
purchasing them. This is just a trade of one type of property for
another, both subject to depreciation. Time preference is not a
distinction between consumption and saving, it is a distinction between
hoarding and investment.

Entrepreneurship necessarily entails speculation and investment. Capital
is required for production, and the entrepreneur is speculating on the
price of what is to be produced. This speculation on a future good is
the unavoidable side effect of producing products with no established
price. Entrepreneurship is therefore "speculative production", while
depreciation of a present good is "speculative consumption". Given that
any future price estimate is subject to error, all investment is to some
extent entrepreneurial. Investment is speculative production and
hoarding is speculative consumption. This is evident in the fact that,
with all capital hoarded, there is no production.

The above discussion makes a distinction between productive and
consumptive use of capital, in the context of a single person. In the
interest of simplicity we have discussed only leisure consumption (i.e.
of a consumer's hoard), avoiding productive consumption (i.e. of a
producer's hoard). While a single person may be both consumer and
producer, a producer must also consume in production. As the terms thus
become overloaded, it is easier to think of a person's investment as
being in another person's production business.

The *objective* of a person is leisure while that of a business is
production. Both objectives are consumptive in nature, yet consumption
in the context of a business is for production, not leisure. Just as any
person, a business must determine its ratio of hoard to investment based
on time preference. The investments of a business cannot be in its own
production, just as those of a person cannot be in his own leisure, as
either would be circular. A business acquires assets and depreciates
them over time. While these are often colloquially referred to as
investments, a business does not pay itself interest. These assets are
hoarded capital in the process of consumption, for the objective of
production. Its remaining capital is invested in other businesses, such
as investment funds or interest-bearing bank accounts. As each person
and business hoards a [fraction](#full-reserve-fallacy)[^735] of its
capital and invests the remainder, [credit
expands](#credit-expansion-fallacy)[^736] on
[money](#money-taxonomy)[^737] as a function of time preference.

The idea of a person being both consumer and producer raises the
categorical question of labor. While all people must consume, most are
also producers. A person engaged in salaried labor is a producer. A
[salaryman](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salaryman)[^738] invests
capital in his person (e.g. education, reputation, food) and invests
time without his human capital when his person is away from his
objective of leisure. Salary and associated benefits are his return on
investment. Due to labor competition, this return seeks the level of
interest on his marketable value over the time laboring.

Speculation is a necessary consequence of error inherent in both
consumption and investment. Hoarding is consumptive and investing is
productive. The economic concept of time preference is specifically the
distinction between hoarding and investment. This is evident in the
identity relation between time preference and economic interest. **A
higher proportion of hoarding to investment reflects a higher time
preference and implies less production.**

## Subjective Inflation Principle

Free [market](#Market) [price
inflation](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflation)[^739] is entirely
the consequence of personal preferences, and therefore not derivable
from anything else.

-   Goods [prices](#Price) are determined subjectively. ([Subjective
    Theory of
    Value](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value)[^740])

-   Time preference determines
    [expansion](#credit-expansion-fallacy)[^741] of credit on money.
    ([Time Preference Axiom](#time-preference-fallacy)[^742])

-   Creation of [money](#money-taxonomy)[^743] is not price
    inflationary. ([Inflation Principle](#inflation-principle)[^744])

This could be more simply obtained from the definition of free
[market](#Market), as entirely the consequence of personal preferences.

## Time Preference Fallacy

There is a theory that lower [time
preference](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_preference)[^745] is
better than higher, as it results in greater production and therefore
greater wealth. This is a reversal of cause and effect.

Time preference is the economic
[axiom](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axiom)[^746] that states people
prefer a "present good" over the same "future good". As a conflict with
[subjective
value](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value)[^747],
this idea cannot be proven. Time is unique in that it is assumed to have
inherent value. This assumption is grounded in the observations that
people have limited time and that it is a necessary factor of all
production.

Value derives from the human perception of [utility](#Utility). A
[person](#Person) who trades a car for a horse objectively values the
usefulness of [owning](#Owner) the horse more than the car. This implies
nothing about why one is more valuable to the person than the other,
even given the [exchange](#Exchange). The [value](#Value) placed on one
good over another is a
[preference](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Preference#Economics)[^748].
It cannot be shown that a person will express a preference for any good,
even his own life. The reason for a preference is not provable in
[rational economic
theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catallactics)[^749], with one
exception -- the effect of wealth on time preference.

Diminishing [marginal
utility](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marginal_utility)[^750] implies
that each additional [unit](#Unit) of a good accumulated by a person has
a lower utility to the person than the previous. This implies that, for
a given [interest](#Interest) rate, increasing wealth implies an
increasing willingness to [lend](#Lend). This is the expression of
falling time preference, and is subsequently reflected in a falling
interest rate due to the increased supply of capital competing for
loans.

The economic rate of interest is merely a reflection of time preference.
While anything can affect a person's time preference, only a change to
wealth implies a necessary change. A higher interest rate implies a
greater willingness for a person of a given time preference to lend. It
would be an error however to assume that higher interest rates increase
time preference. It is a similar error to assume that a person will be
wealthier if he lowers his time preference. These are both reversals of
cause and effect. As such the theory is invalid.

Infinite time preference implies no lending and therefore no production.
Zero time preference implies no consumption of what is produced. Given
that production exists only to satisfy eventual consumption, zero time
preference also implies no production, as there is no value attributable
to the consumption of products. Therefore lowest time preference is not
inherently more productive. As such the theory is invalid. Time
preference is a balance between consumption and production.

A person's wealth increases only to the extent that he is more able to
satisfy his preferences, including those for present and deferred
consumption. States employ fiscal and [monetary
stimulus](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stimulus_(economics))[^751] in
an attempt to increase consumption or production respectively. Yet this
comes at the cost of taxation. The outcome is the shifting of capital
allocation decisions from the market to the state, resulting in capital
wasted on unconsumed (glut) or unavailable (shortage) products. This
implies people are less able to *satisfy* preferences. However it
implies no change to the preferences that they hold, except as tax
diminishes their wealth or subsidy increases it.

Economics does not make value judgments, it infers their necessary
consequence. The theory presumes a morality, which can be assumed but
must be objective. Aggression differentiates the free [market](#Market)
from market intervention, such as by the [state](#State). However, even
if one accepts
[nonaggression](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-aggression_principle)[^752]
as the moral divide, no moral distinction between higher and lower time
preference exists. There is no ratio of consumption to production that
implies aggression, it remains subjective despite being affected by
wealth. As such the theory is invalid.

It can be enlightening to consider the subjectivity of value in terms of
sexual preference.

> { X, Y }\
> { X-\>X, Y-\>Y }\
> { X-\>X\|Y, Y-\>X\|Y }\
> { X-\>Y, Y-\>X }

One might consider this list ordered in terms of increasing production
(i.e. producing more humans). Many states attempt to reduce the
expression of sexual preference to the set { X-\>Y, Y-\>X }. Both
outright
[criminalization](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/LGBT_rights_by_country_or_territory)[^753]
of expression and explicit [financial
incentive](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marriage_promotion)[^754] for
it are employed to this end. This has a discernible impact on expression
of sexual preference but cannot be said to have any impact on the
preference itself.

Similarly it should be clear that an increase in production is not
objectively good. People doing what they prefer is the moral good, again
assuming the moral principle of nonaggression. Even if we assume all
people prefer [continuation of the
species](https://futurism.com/in-order-to-ensure-human-survival-we-must-become-a-multi-planetary-species)[^755],
this implies no effect on individual sexual preferences.

A related theory states that people can demonstrate lower time
preference by [hoarding](#Hoard) more bitcoin. An increased level of
hoarding at the expense of lending implies *higher* time preference. An
increased level of hoarding at the expense of consumption seems to imply
a lower time preference, since consumption appears deferred. Yet a hoard
represents only the liquidity required for consumption.

As a [game of
chance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Game_of_chance)[^756], any
[speculation](#Speculate) is consumption of the cost of "playing",
supported by its required liquidity. This cost is, at a minimum, the
[opportunity
cost](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost)[^757] of not
lending the amount (i.e. interest). Despite the fact that the game, like
all consumption, requires time, the expressed preference is to play the
game, not to capture time value. As such this theory is also invalid.

There is a related theory that time preference is expressed by deferred
consumption -- when a person accumulates savings vs. consuming those
savings. As shown in [Speculative
Consumption](#speculative-consumption)[^758] this misrepresents all
savings as implied investment. Savings is a general term encompassing
both a person's hoard and investment.

Savings is the *source* of all investment, but only actual investment
expresses time preference. A hoard can certainly change in marketable
value. **But considering a greater hoard an expression of lower time
preference is a common colloquial misinterpretation of the economic
meaning of the term.** This reverses its meaning, leading to such
conclusions such as full hoarding expresses zero time preference. Yet
with full hoarding interest rates are infinite, and infinite interest
reflects infinite time preference. This direct contradiction exposes the
fact that the meaning of the term time preference has been reversed,
invalidating the theory.

# Money

## Collectible Tautology

In attempting to apply the [Regression
Theorem](#regression-fallacy)[^759] to Bitcoin one may postulate that
Bitcoin began as a "collectible", arising from interest by monetary
theorists. The collectible obtained original [use
value](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Use_value)[^760] due to their
personal preferences. It was then
[bartered](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barter)[^761] as a
consequence of this [value](#Value), transitioning to a [medium of
exchange](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Medium_of_exchange)[^762]
based on the memory of barter value.

This appears consistent with the
[theorem](https://mises.org/library/human-action-0/html/pp/778)[^763],
which argues that all [money](#money-taxonomy)[^764] *must* originate
from a [commodity](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commodity)[^765] that
obtains barter and then monetary [exchange](#Exchange) value. Yet if
commodity value can arise from potential as money then the theorem is
[tautological](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tautology_(logic))[^766],
implying nothing more than money is money.

> Now, the regression theorem aims at interpreting the first emergence
> of a monetary demand for a good which previously had been demanded
> exclusively for industrial purposes as influenced by the exchange
> value that was ascribed to it at this moment on account of its
> nonmonetary services only.\
> \
> *Ludwig von Mises: Human Action*

The postulate takes advantage of colloquial ambiguity in the word
"commodity", despite the explicit reference to "industrial" use value in
the theorem itself. **If anything can be a commodity then the Regression
Theorem would imply, contrary to its assertion, that anything can be
money.**

> In economics, a commodity is an economic good or service that has full
> or substantial fungibility: that is, the market treats instances of
> the good as equivalent or nearly so with no regard to who produced
> them. \[\...\]\
> \
> Most commodities are raw materials, basic resources, agricultural, or
> mining products, such as iron ore, sugar, or grains like rice and
> wheat. Commodities can also be mass-produced unspecialized products
> such as chemicals and computer memory.\
> \
> *Wikipedia: Commodity*

The Regression Theorem uses "commodity" to distinguish money from
something with no original use value. If it intends that *anything* is a
commodity, it is tautological, and otherwise the postulate is a
misrepresentation of the theorem.

## Debt Loop Fallacy

There is a theory that there is no actual [money](#money-taxonomy)[^767]
in modern [state](#State) systems of
[currency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Currency)[^768]. Instead what
is commonly referred to as "fiat" money is actually a [money
substitute](https://wiki.mises.org/wiki/Money_substitutes)[^769] (e.g. a
legally enforceable claim for money). A money substitute is an
obligation to redeem the substitute for the [borrowed](#Borrow) money
that it represents, so even definitionally this presents a problem --
the basis of the term "loop". The theory relies on the observation that
the state both issues the currency and accepts it, implying an
obligation to do so, such as in the cancellation of debt to the state
(e.g. taxes). As such at issuance the claim is a credit against future
tax settlement, etc. (i.e. the actual money).

Yet money substitutes are claims to a [definite amount of
money](https://wiki.mises.org/wiki/Money_substitutes)[^770], as
otherwise they are not fungible. The amount of tax liability represented
by a \$100 note, in payment of \$100 of tax, is defined in terms of
itself (i.e. the logical error of [circular
reasoning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Circular_reasoning)[^771]) .
The amount it offsets is whatever the state is willing to
[trade](#Trade) for it. This would be the case for any money, including
100 ounces of gold or 100 [units](#Unit) of fiat. **Money does not
represent any amount of another good, it represents whatever it can be
traded for.**

The state incurs no debt in declaring that it will accept a money,
whether it be gold or fiat. Similarly a business that declares that it
will take a particular money incurs no debt by doing so. The debt of
[representative
money](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representative_money)[^772] (a form
of money substitute) such as a [gold
certificate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_certificate)[^773], is
expressed in the trade of the gold for the certificate-holder's claim
against it. Issuance of the money does not change this fact. The state
or a business can certainly issue gold in trade without the gold being
considered a debt. State fiat enjoys [monopoly
protection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Counterfeit)[^774] on
issuance, guaranteeing the state a
[profit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^775] from doing so.
But this is not relevant to the question of whether the fiat is money or
debt.

No money has intrinsic value. Fiat is distinguished from commodity
money, such as gold, only by the presumption of no [use
value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Use_value)[^776]. But given that
[value is
subjective](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value)[^777],
this is not a material distinction. Nor is it an actual one, as paper
money can be burned for heat. If the state mined, minted and accepted
gold or bitcoin, the theory would have to consider units of gold and
bitcoin debt under the same criteria it applies to fiat.

The theory represents a misunderstanding of the nature of money
substitutes. A claim cannot be a claim for itself. In such a scenario,
the claim would
[settle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clearing_(finance))[^778] itself.
In other words, if \$100 was a claim for \$100 worth of anything,
holding the claim is satisfaction of the claim. It would not be a claim
at all, it would be money. As such the theory is invalid.

The transition from claim to fiat happens when representative money is
abrogated by its issuer. The U.S. Dollar was [monetized in
1934](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_Reserve_Act)[^779] when its
redeemability was cancelled. [People](#Person) were compelled to
exchange redeemable dollars for irredeemable dollars. To the extent that
formerly-redeemable dollars remain in circulation, as many still do,
they are converted when encountered by the [Federal
Reserve](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federal_Reserve)[^780]. The
retention of the phrase "Federal Reserve Note" on the irredeemable
Dollar is anachronistic.

All money implies money substitutes, as a [consequence of
lending](#credit-expansion-fallacy)[^781]. We can classify four
hypothetical scenarios for money substitutes in terms of debt
regression, where each step in the regression is a [promissory
note](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Promissory_note)[^782].

-   no regression (money)

-   single regression (representative money)

-   finite regression (money substitute)

-   infinite regression (impossible money)

A note may be a claim for another type of claim, but not for itself
(i.e. whatever it can be traded for). Otherwise there is no actual
regression and the supposed claim *is* money. This holds in the case
where the claim is directly or indirectly entirely circular, as implied
by the term "loop", as the note settles itself. So the term "debt loop"
is simply another description for "money". Examples include Gold,
Bitcoin, and the irredeemable (modern) U.S. Dollar.

A direct claim (single regression) for money is a representative money,
though this term is generally reserved for a tangible note that
represents a [commodity
money](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commodity_money)[^783]. The note
directly represents money. The redeemable U.S. Dollar was a
representative money.

An indirect claim represents any finite progression of claims against
others. When all claims are settled, the money is held by its rightful
[owner](#Owner) with all claims closed out, and any circular claims
fully
[netted](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Set-off_(law)#Close_out_netting)[^784].
Note that if the claims are fully circular there is nothing to settle
(i.e. the claim is money).

An infinite regression of claims [cannot
exist](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turtles_all_the_way_down)[^785].
Consider a hypothetical note issued by the state treasury with
redeemability in terms of offsetting state tax liability.

-   \$1 settles the tax liability on \$10 of income.

-   \$10 settles the tax liability on \$100 of income.

-   \$100 settles the tax liability on \$1000 of income.

-   and so on\...

While the note does not represent itself, its regression is infinite. A
claim can only be made against a finite number of other claims. In this
case any such instrument is not actually a note and could only trade as
money.

## Ideal Money Fallacy

It has been
[proposed](http://sites.stat.psu.edu/~gjb6/nash/money.pdf)[^786] that
the existence of an international non-political (i.e. objective) "value
index" will result in [people](#Person) compelling [states](#State) to
"value target" their monies against the index, thereby eliminating
[price inflation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflation)[^787]. It has
also been suggested that Bitcoin is such an index and will precipitate
this scenario.

The leverage envisioned is the option to leave certain state monies for
others. The movement is from monies of higher inflation to lower, based
on comparison with the index. The consequence is that states must
increasingly target their individual rates of price inflation to the
index. This result is state monies "asymptotically" approaching the
condition of [Ideal
Money](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ideal_money)[^788] represented by
the index.

Ideal Money is state money with a zero rate of price inflation:

> \...there is no ideal rate of inflation that should be selected and
> chosen as the target but rather that the ideal concept would
> necessarily be that of a zero rate for what is called inflation.\
> \
> *John F. Nash Jr.: Ideal Money and Asymptotically Ideal Money*

Expression of the theory is both varied and limited (proof is left to
the reader). However the above summary expresses all essential elements.
Given these limitations it can be helpful to start with generous
assumptions. Let us assume that a money can express objective value (see
[subjective theory of
value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value)[^789]),
that Bitcoin is such a money, and that people generally have the ability
to compare the value of Bitcoin to other major state monies. Let us also
assume that, despite the apparent contradiction, people will both
generally use Bitcoin in [trade](#Trade) (the source of the index) *and*
will prefer to use state monies (a necessary premise).

If we also assume that people are free from [legal tender
laws](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Legal_tender)[^790], and their use
of competing currencies does succeed in compelling states to "value
target" Bitcoin,
[seigniorage6](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^791] will be
eliminated. However, as shown in [Stability
Property](#_Stability_Property)[^792], the purpose of state money
([fiat](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fiat_money)[^793]) is to collect
seigniorage, which is a tax. In other words, Ideal Money is a tax
collection system that collects no tax. Granting the above assumptions,
Ideal Money is the obsolescence of state money. **The proposal fails to
consider the reason that fiat exists in the first place.**

Reconsider now the assumptions. Fiat requires the existence of legal
tender laws and as such [Gresham's
Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gresham%27s_law)[^794] (first penned
by [Nicole Oresme](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nicole_Oresme)[^795] in
*De origine, natura, jure et mutationibus monetarum* c. 1360) always
governs fiat:

> These examples show that, in the absence of effective legal tender
> laws, Gresham's Law works in reverse. If given the choice of what
> money to accept, people will transact with money they believe to be of
> highest long-term value. However, if not given the choice, and
> required to accept all money, good and bad, they will tend to keep the
> money of greater perceived value in their possession, and pass on the
> bad money to someone else. In short, in the absence of legal tender
> laws, the seller will not accept anything but money of certain value
> (good money), while the existence of legal tender laws will cause the
> buyer to offer only money with the lowest commodity value (bad money)
> as the creditor must accept such money at face value.\
> \
> *Wikipedia: Gresham's Law*

The proposal incorrectly assumes that [Thiers'
Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gresham%27s_law#Reverse_of_Gresham's_law_(Thiers'_law))[^796]
governs. If this were the case people would not use fiat. It also
ignores the existence of [foreign exchange
controls](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_exchange_controls)[^797],
which exist specifically to prevent [capital
flight](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capital_flight)[^798]. Such
controls strengthen as capital flight accelerates, in order to preserve
tax revenue. Finally, such controls materially limit price discovery in
the index, making it less useful than the envisioned reference.

The proposal offers no rational explanation for how people will become
able to move between state monies in the face of such controls. It
assumes that people will better recognize the tax, due to the presence
of the index and their ability to compare against it, and therefore will
more effectively control the state's appetite for the tax. Given the
near universal use of gold as a comparably objective index prior to the
evolution of global fiat, it is not clear how fiat ever took hold if we
can assume people will react to it in this manner.

There is an argument that Bitcoin is an objective index whereas gold is
not. This is based on the inflationary supply of gold in contrast to the
fixed supply of Bitcoin. This assumes that monetary inflation implies an
unstable money whereas fixed supply implies a stable money. As shown in
Stability Property, both monies are stable. The argument fails to
acknowledge that value, as indicated by the index, is a consequence of
both supply and demand. Gold demand is stabilized by inflation and
Bitcoin's demand is stabilized by fees.

The theory is therefore invalid. Either fiat will cease to exist or it
will collect tax. States only surrender this tax under extreme duress
and in such cases only briefly. If anything the "ideal money" will be
Bitcoin, and it will not trade freely with state monies (to the extent
they remain).

## Inflation Fallacy

Bitcoin [consensus rules](#Consensus_Rules) create a period of [monetary
inflation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation)[^799].
There is a theory that this causes the money to lose [purchasing
power](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Purchasing_power)[^800]. As shown
in [Inflation Principle](#inflation-principle)[^801], **no change in
purchasing power is implied by supply increase of a market money**. The
theory is therefore invalid.

The fact that Bitcoin is not price inflationary implies that
[owners](#Owner) do not "subsidize" [mining](#Mine). The capital
consumed by [miners](#Miner) is their own ([investment](#Lend)), the
money created is their own product, and the return on investment
([interest](#Interest)) is a consequence of the increase in demand that
they alone provide -- offsetting the [opportunity
cost](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost)[^802] of
deploying their own capital over time.

## Money Taxonomy

Fiat money does not have [use
value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Use_value)[^803]. It has
[utility](#Utility) as a money only to the extent that [people](#Person)
are willing to [trade](#Trade) for it. These people may and often do
include an issuing [state](#State), though this is not a distinguishing
characteristic. The name derives from the fact that it is decreed to
exist ("dixitque Deus fiat lux et facta est lux"[^804]) as money.
However such a declaration is also not a distinguishing characteristic.
**Fiat is simply money without use value.** Money with use value is
referred to as [commodity
money[^805].](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commodity_money)

While [value is
subjective](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value)[^806],
making it impossible to determine use value in practice, the
classification itself is clear. Paper money can be burned for heat, but
this is typically not considered a material use value. Bitcoin can be
used for
[timestamping](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trusted_timestamping)[^807],
but this is also not typically considered a material use value. Gold,
silver, copper, and other coinage is generally considered to have
material use value. When a commodity money's face value becomes less
than its commodity value, it has [transitioned to a
commodity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Venezuelan_bol%C3%ADvar#Bol%C3%ADvar_fuerte_2)[^808]
and is melted or
[hoarded](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gresham%27s_law)[^809].

A [money
substitute](https://wiki.mises.org/wiki/Money_substitutes)[^810] is a
[contractual
claim](https://financial-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/Contractual+Claim)[^811]
to a definite amount of money, redeemable on demand. As such a money
substitute represents a "future good" while money is a "present good".
[Fiat is not a money substitute](#_Debt_Loop_Fallacy)[^812] because it
is not redeemable for any definite amount of money, it is the money
itself. Debt is often
[securitized](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Securitization)[^813] and
guaranteed by the lender as a money substitute, known as a
[banknote](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Banknote)[^814]. Given that
[value](#Value) is subjective, it is also not possible to distinguish
whether a person values the redemption, or the claim itself, but the
assumption is generally that the redemption is valued, not the document
it is written on. When a money substitute is abrogated yet still trades
it has [transitioned to
fiat](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_certificate)[^815].

[Representative
money](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representative_money)[^816] is
often misinterpreted as a present good, yet because it is a claim (to
what it represents), it is a money substitute. The gold-backed U.S.
Dollar was a money substitute and the modern U.S. Dollar is fiat.
Account-based U.S. Dollars are [electronic money
substitutes](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/e/electronic-money.asp)[^817],
just as are all custodial Bitcoin accounts and trade in
[unconfirmed](#Unconfirmed) [transactions](#Transaction). These are
promises to redeem in dollars or bitcoin respectively.

The dollars that one can hold in one's hand are fiat, just as are the
bitcoin that one can spend with one's private keys. As such the term
"fiat" alone does not distinguish between the Dollar and Bitcoin.
*However this distinction was never required before the existence of
Bitcoin.* Market monies without use value were presumed [not to be
possible](#regression-fallacy)[^818]. However there is a material
distinction between these two types of money, neither of which have use
value. This begs for a new differentiating term.

The Dollar (as all state fiat) differs from Bitcoin in that it depends
on [monopoly
protection](https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/pp/1054)[^819]
for production. It is this prohibition of market competition that allows
the state to limit supply and therefore extract
[seigniorage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^820].

> monopoly is a grant of special privilege by the State, reserving a
> certain area of production to one particular individual or group\
> \
> *Murray Rothbard: Man, Economy and State*

The monopoly on production of state fiat is created by
[anti-counterfeit[^821]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Counterfeit_money)
statute. A [unit](#Unit) of the money is considered [invalid](#Validity)
unless produced by an [authorized
agent](https://www.moneyfactory.gov)[^822] of the [state](#State). This
is distinct from Bitcoin, as it is produced by [market](#Market)
competition and counterfeit is precluded by agreement on a public
ledger. Money secured against counterfeit by statute may then reasonably
be referred to as "monopoly money" (not to be confused with [Monopoly
Money](https://monopoly.fandom.com/wiki/Monopoly_Money)[^823]), and
Bitcoin as "market money". When the face value of fiat is reduced to its
production cost it has transitioned to [market
money](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zimbabwean_dollar)[^824].

Commodity money is also market money, as it does not rely on monopoly
privilege to restrict its supply. If commodity money supply is too
great, it ceases to be a useful money due to the lack of portability.
The distinction between commodity money and Bitcoin is obtained from
[cryptodynamic principles](#cryptodynamic-principles)[^825]. Commodity
money supply is controlled through market competition to supply it, as a
consequence of its market demand. It is not fiat given the presumption
of use value.

Both money and money substitutes constitute
[currency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Currency)[^826]. Money is
sometimes referred to as base money. All monies are subject to lending
and therefore necessarily [credit
expansion](#credit-expansion-fallacy)[^827] (i.e. into money
substitutes) and its corresponding [fractional
reservation](#reserve-definition)[^828].

The following table offers examples of each of the aforementioned
classifications.

-   currency

    -   money \[*present*\]

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   commodity \[*use value*\]

    monopoly

    **U.S. Dollar Coin**

    market

    **Bullion**

-   fiat \[*no use value*\]

    monopoly

    **U.S. Dollar Bill**

    market

    **Bitcoin**

    -   money substitute \[*future*\]

-   electronic \[*intangible*\]

    account

    **Visa**

-   representative \[*tangible*\]

    banknote

    **U.S. Silver Certificate**

## Regression Fallacy

The [Regression
Theorem](https://wiki.mises.org/wiki/Regression_theorem)[^829] relies on
the assumption that the first [people](#Person) to [value](#Value)
something as a money[^830] must do so based on a memory of its prior
[use value](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Use_value)[^831], with the
thing eventually obtaining
[barter](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barter)[^832]
[utility](#Utility) and [finally monetary
value](https://mises.org/library/human-action-0/html/pp/778)[^833].

> No good can be employed for the function of a medium of exchange which
> at the very beginning of its use for this purpose did not have
> exchange value on account of other employments.\
> \
> *Ludwig von Mises: Human Action*

Notice that the theory does not merely attempt to explain the origin of
the money concept, but of *anything that can be a money*. In other
words, if a good does not follow this progression, it is not money.

The theorem contradicts the [subjective theory of
value](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value)[^834]
upon which it relies. Value is subjective, which implies it can be based
on anything, even if objectively that basis appears irrational.

**The theorem fails to terminate its regression by not explaining how a
person comes to value something for its original utility.** One must
assume (not remember) something will be useful if nobody has ever
attempted to use it. This assumption of utility is the first valuation,
which remains subjective. The first valuation of a thing, like all
after, can be for any reason, i[ncluding its use as a
money](#collectible-tautology)[^835].

Given a pre-existing concept of money, it has been
[suggested](https://mises.org/library/cryptocurrencies-and-wider-regression-theorem)[^836]
that anticipation of being a money is sufficient to satisfy the theorem.
In other words the money does not need to follow the progression in
actual practice. In this case, given a pre-existing concept of money,
anything can begin as money. This interpretation renders the theorem
tautological -- anything that people value as money can be money. In
other words, it reduces to subjective first value.

The theorem is actually based on the *empirical* observation of monetary
evolution. Yet the rational [economic
theory](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catallactics)[^837] on which it
is based, and the theorem itself, explicitly reject empiricism.

> All these statements implied in the regression theorem are enounced
> apodictically as implied in the apriorism of praxeology. It must
> happen this way. Nobody can ever succeed in construction a
> hypothetical case in which things were to occur in a different way.

One of many problems with empirical economics is that new observations
can invalidate previous conclusions. Bitcoin has done so to this theorem
which purported to be non-empirical. It can clearly be observed that
[Satoshi intended to create a
money](https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf)[^838], for its first use as
money.

The idea is a reasonable empirical *theory* on the evolution of the
concept of money, but invalid as a rational *theorem* to distinguish
money from non-money. Money is distinguished by certain behaviors
expressed by people. Concluding that something is a money consists of
observing those behaviors, a strictly empirical method.[]{#_Toc59500667
.anchor}

## Reserve Definition

A reserve is the capital a [person](#Person) possesses. It is present
capital, as opposed to [invested](#Lend) capital. Present capital
[depreciates](#depreciation-principle)[^839] and as such represents an
ongoing cost to its [owner](#Owner). The ratio of reserved to invested
capital is a [reflection](#_Savings_Relation)[^840] of the owner's [time
preference](#time-preference-fallacy).

Reserve capital intended for the
[settlement](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Settlement_(finance))[^841]
of debts is the settlement medium. For example, where gold is the
settlement medium, gold is the reserve capital. A promise for gold, such
as a [gold
certificate](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_certificate)[^842], is
a loan and therefore not a reserve against the debt. If the debt can be
settled with gold certificates, then possession of the certificates
constitutes reserve.

While holding a certificate as reserve against certificate debt may
appear to contradict the definition of reserve as present capital, it
does not. As the settlement medium the certificate itself is nothing
more than a piece of paper to the person holding it in reserve. The
terms it carries are to be passed to the certificate's issuer. No costs
or gains in settling the certificate are experienced by the person
holding it in reserve. His settlement cost is only a consequence of
transferring the paper to his creditor.

Reserve is often conflated with [maturity
matching](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asset%E2%80%93liability_mismatch)[^843].
Management of disparate loan
[maturities](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maturity_(finance))[^844]
and rates of [interest](#Interest) is a risk management strategy. While
capital reservation is also a risk management strategy, **the
distinction of a reserve is that reserved capital is "present", having a
maturity of zero.**

## Risk Free Return Fallacy

The hypothetical concept of [risk free rate of
return](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Risk-free_interest_rate)[^845] is
the economic [interest](#Interest) rate obtainable with a guaranteed
return of [loan](#Lend) principal. There is a theory that Bitcoin allows
this to exist in actual practice by enforcing principal return. A
corollary to the theory is that this capability can limit [credit
expansion](#credit-expansion-fallacy)[^846] generally.

The theory requires a provable fixed time
[covenant](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Covenant_(law))[^847] on the
lent [units](#Unit) of [coin](#Coin) by the lender. The covenant ensures
that the lender cannot spend the units until
[maturity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maturity_(finance))[^848] of
the loan and that ownership of the units returns to the lender at that
time. The lender trades with a [borrower](#Borrow) these encumbered
units in [exchange](#Exchange) for interest. The lender's [opportunity
cost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost)[^849] imposed by
the covenant is offset by this interest.

However, the units provide no monetary value to the borrower. Full
control over the units provably returns to the lender, leaving any
[person](#Person) who has accepted them with nothing at that time.
**This zero value is necessarily imputed to each exchange prior to
maturity and therefore to the loan itself, invalidating the theory.**

There is a related theory that the opportunity cost of the lender can be
used to represent a provable expense, just as with
[proof-of-work](#Proof_Of_Work). This may be used similarly to
[hashcash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hashcash)[^850] as a way to
mitigate [denial of
service](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Denial-of-service_attack)[^851].
This is true, however this is an expense and can be achieved by spending
(including destroying) units. Just as with proof-of-work, this is a
trade of provable capital cost for units. As such it does not constitute
a loan (i.e. earns no interest), invalidating the theory.

There is a related theory that the units can be used by the borrower to
instead track an asset of perpetual value. Given that the tracking
expires at maturity, this theory is invalid for the same reason. There
is a related theory that the lent units can be used for tracking a
fixed-term asset that expires at loan maturity (e.g. a theatre ticket).
This is true, however the cost of tracking, for any duration, is limited
in BTC by the dust consensus rule to 1 unit. As such the opportunity
cost is limited to 1 unit plus at least one [transaction](#Transaction)
[fee](#Fee) for establishing 0the loan.

The [utility](#Utility) to the borrower is the reduction of the tracking
cost over the loan term. At an interest rate of 10% and expiration
beyond [approximately 7.2
years](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule_of_72)[^852] it becomes
cheaper to spend 1 unit than to borrow it. By instead spending just 1
unit outright the asset may be tracked perpetually.

While the final scenario is economically rational, it cannot be
accurately described as a loan since the unit can neither be traded nor
destroyed by the so-called borrower. It would be more appropriate to
refer to this as "rental" of the unit, if only to distinguish it from
true lending.

Nevertheless, a return can theoretically be earned on the rental of 1
unit, up to the economic limit imposed by the interest rate (e.g. \~7.2
years at 10%). Yet the fee required for this to be economically rational
must be 0 units, as the rental-establishing transaction is required,
where it is not when using one's own unit for tracking. So in the case
where demand to transact exceeds the fixed [confirmation](#Confirmation)
supply, this scenario is not economically rational. This relation holds
at any enforced coin dust level above zero to the extent that dust is an
insufficient fee to finance confirmation.

## Thin Air Fallacy

There is a theory that [fractional reserve
banking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fractional-reserve_banking)[^853]
inherently gives banks the ability to create money at no material cost.
The theory does not depend on the [state](#State) privilege of
[seigniorage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^854]. It is
considered a consequence of the accounting practices of [free
banking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_banking)[^855]. This is
sometimes referred to as creating money *ex nihilo* or "[out of thin
air](https://cdn.evbuc.com/eventlogos/67785745/turner.pdf)"[^856].

> Banks do not, as too many textbooks still suggest, take deposits of
> existing money from savers and lend it out to borrowers: they create
> credit and money ex nihilo -- extending a loan to the borrower and
> simultaneously crediting the borrower's money account.\
> \
> *Lord Turner, Chairman of the UK Financial Services Authority until
> its abolition in March 2013\
> Stockholm School of Economics Conference on: "Towards a Sustainable
> Financial System\"\
> 12 September 2013*

Adherents describe two competing views on money creation. The
traditional understanding is naive in relation to their more practical
view, as implied by Lord Turner. The theory states that banking
inherently creates not only credit, but also money.

Naive View

Money is created by [miners](#Miner) at a material cost, potentially
sold to [people](#Person), and eventually [lent](#Lend) to people. This
theory holds that the lender is lending only money he [owns](#Owner). As
such the lender is operating at [full
reserve](#full-reserve-fallacy)[^857] and cannot engage in the practice
of fractional reserve, which is considered fraudulent. As an honest
lender he is only able to issue claims ([representative
money](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representative_money)[^858])
against money in his possession, preventing [credit
expansion](#credit-expansion-fallacy)[^859] and therefore persistent
[price inflation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflation)[^860].

Practical View

Money substitutes are created by banks, at no material cost, as a
consequence of fractional reserve lending. The supply of these
substitutes expands with every loan, contracting only as loans are
[settled](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clearing_(finance))[^861]. Given
the implied lack of constraint on credit expansion, overall debt grows
without bound, creating persistent price inflation.

In a free market people can perform the same operations as banks,
without necessarily calling themselves banks. Therefore the distinction
between these two possibilities must be based on obscuration of the
supposed fraud. The theory holds that this obscuration is accomplished
using an accounting trick that is not widely understood. So let us
investigate the difference. Any money will suffice in this investigation
of the [money
substitutes](https://wiki.mises.org/wiki/Money_substitutes)[^862]
created in either case, including Gold, Bitcoin or [monopoly
money](#money-taxonomy)[^863].

In the naive view, the potential lender has saved both the liquidity
required for personal consumption ([hoard](#Hoard)) and the amount
intended for earning [interest](#Interest) ([investment](#Lend)). All
lending in this scenario originates from savings, such as gold
accumulated from
[panning](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_panning)[^864]. Savings
includes the sum of the hoard (money) and the amount that credit exceeds
debt: savings = money + (credit - debt). Money is gold and credits are
money substitutes:

           Savings   Money   Credit   Debt
  -------- --------- ------- -------- ------
  Person   100oz     100oz            

In this view of personal lending, Person hands over 81oz of gold to
Borrower. Borrower accepts an obligation to repay Person with interest
at [loan
maturity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maturity_(finance))[^865]. To
simplify the accounting we will assume zero interest and no accounting
(i.e. discounting) for repayment risk:

             Savings   Money   Credit   Debt
  ---------- --------- ------- -------- ------
  Person     100oz     19oz    81oz     
  Borrower             81oz             81oz

Person has actually lent to his own enterprise (e.g. lending business) a
fraction of his savings, which is accounted for below. Let us assume
that Person hoards 10% of his savings for the liquidity required for
near-term consumption and his Business hoards 10% for the same reason:

             Savings   Money   Credit   Debt
  ---------- --------- ------- -------- ------
  Person     100oz     10oz    90oz     
  Business             9oz     81oz     90oz
  Borrower             81oz             81oz

Person's business is operating with 10% reserve, as 90% of his deposited
money is at risk of default. Projecting this into the naive view of
banking requires only renaming "Lender" to "Depositor" and "Business" to
"Bank". There is no need to assume that these are distinct individuals:

              Savings   Money   Credit   Debt
  ----------- --------- ------- -------- ------
  Depositor   100oz     10oz    90oz     
  Bank                  9oz     81oz     90oz
  Borrower              81oz             81oz

By properly accounting for Person having money at risk (i.e. a
depositor) we can see that all lending is fractionally reserved. There
are two loans in this scenario reserved at 10%, resulting in monetary
substitutes (credit) of 171% of money. Given the assumption of uniform
time preference14, Borrower will lend 90% of his savings, as will all
subsequent borrowers. Assuming a minimum practical loan of 1oz, after 43
loans credit expansion terminates at 8.903 times the amount of money.

Where r is the uniform level of individual reserve and m is the amount
of money, the total amount of credit c for any number of loans n is
given by the following [partial
sum](https://www.wolframalpha.com/input/?i=sum+of+m+*+(1-r)%5En+as+n+goes+from+1+to+infinity)[^866]:

> c = â(n=1..n)\[m \* (1 - r)\^n\] =\
> (m \* (r - 1) ((1 - r)\^n - 1))/r =\
> (100oz \* (10% - 1) ((1 - 10%)\^43 - 1))/10% = 890.3oz

The [reserve
ratio](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reserve_requirement)[^867] rr is
given by the ratio of money to credit:

> rr = m/c = 100oz/890.3oz = \~11.23%

The [money
multiplier](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_multiplier)[^868] is
given by the inverse of the reserve ratio:

> 1/rr = 1/(100oz/890.3oz) = 8.903

It is only because a single dollar is considered the smallest lendable
unit that the series is limited to 43 iterations. A continuous function
produces a money multiplier of 9 at 10% hoarding.

Iteration yields the following table:

  Loan   Hoarded   Lent    Credit
  ------ --------- ------- --------
  1      10.00     90.00   90.00
  2      19.00     81.00   171.00
  3      27.10     72.90   243.90
  4      34.39     65.61   309.51
  5      40.95     59.05   368.56
  6      46.86     53.14   421.70
  7      52.17     47.83   469.53
  8      56.95     43.05   512.58
  9      61.26     38.74   551.32
  10     65.13     34.87   586.19
  11     68.62     31.38   617.57
  12     71.76     28.24   645.81
  13     74.58     25.42   671.23
  14     77.12     22.88   694.11
  15     79.41     20.59   714.70
  16     81.47     18.53   733.23
  17     83.32     16.68   749.91
  18     84.99     15.01   764.91
  19     86.49     13.51   778.42
  20     87.84     12.16   790.58
  21     89.06     10.94   801.52
  22     90.15     9.85    811.37
  23     91.14     8.86    820.23
  24     92.02     7.98    828.21
  25     92.82     7.18    835.39
  26     93.54     6.46    841.85
  27     94.19     5.81    847.67
  28     94.77     5.23    852.90
  29     95.29     4.71    857.61
  30     95.76     4.24    861.85
  31     96.18     3.82    865.66
  32     96.57     3.43    869.10
  33     96.91     3.09    872.19
  34     97.22     2.78    874.97
  35     97.50     2.50    877.47
  36     97.75     2.25    879.72
  37     97.97     2.03    881.75
  38     98.18     1.82    883.58
  39     98.36     1.64    885.22
  40     98.52     1.48    886.70
  41     98.67     1.33    888.03
  42     98.80     1.20    889.22
  43     98.92     1.08    890.30

Notice that, at full expansion, for any person to spend from his hoard
while maintaining his time preference, a loan must be settled to offset
the spending. The settlement process moves the money from the former
borrower to its lender, and cancels the note. The person in receipt of
the spent money must lend it in order to satisfy his time preference,
and so on.

No further expansion is possible without an increase in the amount of
money or an overall reduction in time preference. An increase in money
increases the absolute amount of credit and a reduction in time
preference increases the proportion of credit to money. Given that money
and credit evolve together, there is never any actual increase in money
substitutes apart from these changes.

In the typical practice of bank accounting, Bank does not hand over the
money. Instead it creates account entries in a process referred to as
"credit creation". It creates offsetting
[ledger](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ledger)[^869] entries for
Depositor's proceeds and loan ("credit" and "debt"), and offsetting
[balance sheet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Balance_sheet)[^870]
entries for itself ("asset" and "liability"). At the time of loan
issuance, the accounts are as follows:

  Savings     Money   Credit   Debt   Asset   Liability   
  ----------- ------- -------- ------ ------- ----------- -------
  Depositor   100oz   10oz     90oz           100oz       
  Bank                90oz     81oz   171oz   171oz       171oz
  Borrower                     81oz   81oz    81oz        81oz

This is where [explanations of the
theory](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1057521915001477)[^871]
tend to terminate. The offsetting accounts of both Bank and Borrower
balance, but Borrower has 81oz of gold to spend, and Bank has not had to
turn over any gold to Borrower. There is still only 100oz of money, but
Borrower has 81oz of money substitute and Bank has 81oz more in assets.
The theory proclaims that Bank has thus created not only credit, but
also *money*. Notice that everything still balances, and all accounts
can be settled, seemingly validating the theory as espoused by Lord
Turner, that "\...they create credit and money ex nihilo -- extending a
loan to the borrower and simultaneously crediting the borrower's money
account."

This however demonstrates no actual spending of either the loan credit
or the bank asset. Let us take this a bit further by assuming Borrower
clears his account, and therefore the corresponding Bank asset and
liability entries.

              Savings   Money   Credit   Debt   Asset   Liability
  ----------- --------- ------- -------- ------ ------- -----------
  Depositor   100oz     10oz    90oz            100oz   
  Bank                  9oz     81oz     90oz   90oz    90oz
  Borrower              81oz             81oz   81oz    81oz

Notice that the this is identical to the outcome of the naive view.
**There is no distinction between these supposedly competing views on
money creation**, invaliding the theory. This resolves the
[centuries-old
debate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Credit_theory_of_money#Scholarship)[^872],
apparently begun between
[Plato](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plato)[^873] and
[Aristotle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aristotle)[^874], regarding
whether money is based on mining or credit. The theories are identical,
as money and credit are a
[duality](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/duality)[^875].

> According to Joseph Schumpeter, the first known advocate of a credit
> theory of money was Plato. Schumpeter describes metallism as the other
> of "two fundamental theories of money", saying the first known
> advocate of metallism was Aristotle.

Adherents of the two theories are merely [talking past each
other](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talking_past_each_other)[^876].
Bitcoin, as fiat (i.e.
[non-use-value](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Use_value)[^877] money)
[without state support](#value-proposition)[^878], has finally made
observable both the logical errors of
[metallism](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metallism)[^879], which
[attempted to show](#regression-fallacy)[^880] the necessity of use
value to money, and
[chartalism](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chartalism)[^881], which
[attempted to show](#_Debt_Loop_Fallacy)[^882] the necessity of state
support to fiat.

Recall that each loan is reserved at 10%, so Bank can lend up 8.903
times the amount of money on reserve, or 890.3oz of money substitute
against 100oz money reserved. If Bank reserves each loan at 0%, credit
expansion would be infinite. However this implies zero time preference,
or the idea that time has no value, implying that all money is lent
indefinitely. In the case of Bank, 0% reserve implies no liquidity to
satisfy any withdrawal (i.e. immediate failure). Yet given zero time
preference there could never be any withdrawals, making the scenario
irrelevant. Credit expansion is necessarily finite.

So let us revisit the scenario where Bank creates credit at negative
reserve (i.e. out of thin air), this time considering spending. For
example, on deposits of 0oz Bank intends to issue a loan of 1000oz.
Instead of relying on reserved money to eventually settle the loan, Bank
"creates money" on its balance sheet. Bank then increases Borrower's
credit and debt accounts, representing the borrowed money and the
obligation to repay respectively:

             Savings   Money   Credit   Debt     Asset    Liability
  ---------- --------- ------- -------- -------- -------- -----------
  Bank                         1000oz   1000oz   1000oz   1000oz
  Borrower                     1000oz   1000oz   1000oz   1000oz

When Borrower trades 1oz (from his credit account) for a car, his credit
account is decreased by 1oz and Merchant's is increased by 1oz. Note
that Borrower now owes Bank 1oz, as anticipated by the loan agreement.

             Savings   Money   Credit   Debt     Asset    Liability
  ---------- --------- ------- -------- -------- -------- -----------
  Bank                         1000oz   1000oz   1000oz   1000oz
  Borrower   -1oz              999oz    1000oz   999oz    1000oz
  Merchant   1oz               1oz               1oz      

All looks good until Merchant attempts to withdraw from his account. At
that point Bank has defaulted and Merchant is unpaid. If Merchant's
account is with another bank, the payment fails as soon as the two banks
attempt to settle accounts. With a hypothetical negative reserve, the
accounts balance as follows, indicating [Bank's
demise](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bank_failure)[^883] (negative
money):

             Savings   Money   Credit   Debt     Asset   Liability
  ---------- --------- ------- -------- -------- ------- -----------
  Bank       -1oz      -1oz    1000oz   999oz    999oz   999oz
  Borrower                     999oz    1000oz   999oz   1000oz
  Merchant   1oz       1oz                       1oz     

The money [must actually be
moved](https://www.brinks.com/en/public/brinks/logistics)[^884] from the
control of Bank to Merchant or Merchant's bank, which is not possible. A
simpler example is the failure of any attempt by Borrower to
[withdraw](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automated_teller_machine)[^885]
from his account. Bank may create as much money substitute as it wants,
but negative reserve is just an [empty
promise](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/empty_promise)[^886]. In this
example Bank has created 1000oz of promises that it cannot keep.

The failure to recognize these principles likely results from failure to
consider the [settlement
process](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IzE038REw2k)[^887]. This likely
stems from the failure to recognize the inherent *duality of money and
credit*, as the former must always exist to settle the claims implied by
the latter. This likely stems from the habit of referring to money (e.g.
gold) in the same terms as money substitutes (e.g. credits for gold).

The offsetting asset and liability entries served only to account for
loans issued and outstanding, which are the basis of Bank's balance
sheet. Bank similarly did not create the offsetting credit and debt
entries to obscure fraudulent money creation. Bank created these
accounts for two reasons:

-   Preclude physical transfer just to redeposit the money into Bank.

-   Encourage redeposit into Bank as opposed to a competitor (or
    Borrower hoard).

When Bank has insufficient reserve to satisfy withdrawals, either due to
loans in default or a [bank
run](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bank_run)[^888], it has only two
options, default or borrow. To prevent the former, [central
banking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_bank)[^889] exists to
provide the latter. This is the meaning of the term "[lender of last
resort](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lender_of_last_resort)"[^890].
[State Banking Principle](#state-banking-principle)[^891] provides a
detailed explanation of this actual source of [monetary
inflation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation)[^892].

In summary, it has been shown that:

-   Banks have no ability to create money.

-   Fractional reserve is inherent in lending.

-   The fraction of reserve is an expression of time preference.

-   Zero reserve eliminates any chance of being able to settle accounts.

-   No distinction exists between naive and practical theories of money
    creation.

## Unlendable Money Fallacy

The [Fisher
Equation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fisher_equation)[^893] must be
used for combining a rate of growth in a money that is itself subject to
[inflation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation)[^894], as
depreciation occurs in the future money. This adjusts the nominal
interest rate to obtain the real interest rate. Presentation is
simplified by using ratios in place of rates. As shown in [Depreciation
Principle](#depreciation-principle)[^895], the commodity money growth
rate is 0%, or a growth ratio of 100%.

[Monopoly money](#money-taxonomy)[^896] exhibits depreciation due to
[seigniorage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^897].

> monopoly-money-growth-ratio = commodity-money-growth-ratio /
> seigniorage-ratio\
> 100% / 103% = \~97%

Fixed supply money may appreciate due to [price
deflation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deflation)[^898]

> fixed-supply-money-growth-ratio = commodity-money-growth-ratio /
> inflation-ratio\
> 100% / 97% = \~103%

A fixed-supply money is presumed to change in [purchasing
power](#inflation-principle)[^899] in proportion to the products it
represents (i.e. demand). In other words, with twice the amount of
products each [unit](#Unit) of the money will [trade](#Trade) for twice
its previous amount of products.

> purchasing-power-this-year = purchasing-power-last-year \*
> annual-growth-ratio\
> 100 \* 103% = 103

The presumption of fixed-supply money price deflation rests on the
assumption of positive economic growth. In the case of economic
contraction the money exhibits [price
inflation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflation)[^900]. The case of
economic growth (increasing wealth) implies interest exceeds
depreciation. Both interest and depreciation must always be positive as
implied by [time preference](#time-preference-fallacy)[^901].

> interest-ratio \> depreciation-ratio \> 100%\
> interest-ratio / growth-ratio = depreciation-ratio\
> interest-ratio / growth-ratio \> 100%\
> interest-ratio \> growth-ratio

Economic contraction (decreasing wealth) implies an increasing rate of
[interest](#Interest), as implied by the theory of [marginal
utility](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marginal_utility)[^902], until
positive growth is restored. As such contraction is a self-correcting
condition.

> depreciation-ratio \> interest-ratio \> 100%\
> interest-ratio / growth-ratio = depreciation-ratio\
> interest-ratio / growth-ratio \> 100%\
> interest-ratio \> growth-ratio

Notice that in both cases of economic growth and contraction, interest
must exceed growth, as [lending](#Lend) is the only source of growth.
Given that growth is the sole basis of deflation in a deflationary
money, hoarding the money represents monetary depreciation
(consumption).

There is a theory that it is economically irrational to lend a
deflationary money. **As has been shown, it is rational to lend any
money, including one that is deflationary, invalidating the theory.**
Any contrary behavior implies a purely [speculative
condition](#speculative-consumption)[^903], not supported by the fact of
fixed supply.

# Price

## Lunar Fallacy

There is a theory that [hoarding](#Hoard) bitcoin guarantees to
perpetual [profit](#Profit). The theory is based on the following
economic laws.

-   One money is better than two ([Metcalfe's
    Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metcalfe%27s_law)[^904])

-   Better money displaces other monies ([Thiers'
    Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gresham%27s_law#Reverse_of_Gresham's_law_(Thiers'_law))[^905])

-   At fixed [supply](#Supply), [price](#Price) rises with demand ([Law
    of Supply and
    Demand](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Supply_and_demand)[^906])

-   Potential increase in demand is unbounded ([trade](#Trade) is
    positive sum)

Hoarding is purely [speculative](#Speculate), with all returns
constituting profit or [loss](#Loss). The money is not [lent](#Lend) to
another for [interest](#Interest) and so is always available for
[exchange](#Exchange), a benefit that offsets interest forgone.

A corollary to the theory is that no investment in production is
required to profit from it. Capital is required for all production.
Lenders (investors) earn interest in exchange for time without their
capital. **Production is the source of trade and therefore all economic
activity results from investment.** A hoard is defined by its lack of
consumption in production. If all people hoarded their capital, there
would be nothing to trade and therefore no demand for the money.

It seems that the theory is irrational, supporting the idea that Bitcoin
is indeed [Magic Internet
Money](https://medium.com/@paulbars/magic-internet-money-how-a-reddit-ad-made-bitcoin-hit-1000-and-inspired-south-parks-art-b414ec7a5598)[^907].
When a theory results in a contradiction, the theory is flawed. A [fixed
supply market money](#money-taxonomy)[^908] can only increase in
purchasing power due to:

1.  economic growth -- creating more demand for use of the money is
    exchange

2.  monetization -- people transferring demand from another money

Yet economic growth is strictly the result of investment. Growth is
[necessarily](#depreciation-principle)[^909] less than the return on
investment (interest), and full hoarding is no investment at all. And of
course monetization has a limit. Finally, the theory fails to recognize
the [stability property](#_Stability_Property)[^910] of Bitcoin. For
these reasons the theory is invalid.

![](media/image84.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

## Price Estimation

The potential [capitalization](#Capitalization), and therefore potential
[unit](#Unit) [price](#Price), of Bitcoin is estimated in various ways.
A common approach is to imagine Bitcoin replacing [all state
money](https://www.fool.com/investing/2017/05/25/could-the-price-of-bitcoin-go-to-1-million.aspx)[^911]
or even [gross world
product](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gross_world_product)[^912]. Other
approaches that use [models of past
price](https://medium.com/@100trillionUSD/modeling-bitcoins-value-with-scarcity-91fa0fc03e25)[^913]
to predict future price are [economically
irrational](#stock-to-flow-fallacy)[^914] and therefore not considered
here. The presumption of Bitcoin as global [reserve
currency](#reservation-principle)[^915] is dismissed for reasons
discussed in [Reserve Currency
Fallacy](#reserve-currency-fallacy)[^916]. The effects of
[speculative](#Speculate) [hoarding](#Hoard) on price are not
considered, based on the
[Catallactic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catallactics)[^917]
[disproof of speculation as a determinant of
price](https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/949)[^918].

Given that Bitcoin is [money](#money-taxonomy)[^919] and not credit, the
"money" approach is a more rational starting assumption. Yet without a
clear understanding of the essential distinction between money and
credit, this approach is often flawed in practice. As shown in [Credit
Expansion Fallacy](#credit-expansion-fallacy)[^920], Bitcoin cannot
limit credit expansion. If it eliminated credit expansion
(hypothetically), there would be no production whatsoever and it would
be worth nothing. The most rational starting assumption regarding credit
expansion, is that Bitcoin is reserved at the same rate as other monies.
The rate of credit expansion is driven by human [time
preference](#time-preference-fallacy)[^921] alone, so this is an
assumption that production is therefore consistent with historical
norms.

Let us consider five possible choices for "money" replacement by
Bitcoin:

-   Tangible money.

-   Base money (M0).

-   Bank credit (M3-M0).

-   All credit (bank, debt, equity).

-   Gross product.

Using tangible money ("vault cash") only is an irrational approach. The
money that is accounted for as a money equivalent must also be included
if one is to consider tangible money, since they are of the same supply.
[Central banks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_bank)[^922] print
and coin tangible money when required, against a base of "obligations"
to do so, and all credit in the money is expanded against this base.
This concept is discussed in [State Banking
Principle](#state-banking-principle)[^923]. Using credit is also an
irrational approach, since Bitcoin is not credit. As a money it is used
to [settle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Settlement_(finance))[^924]
credit obligations. This concept is discussed in [Debt Loop
Fallacy](#_Debt_Loop_Fallacy)[^925]. So of course using any combination
of money and credit (such as [M1, M2 or
M3](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_supply#United_States)[^926], as
these include M0) is irrational by the same reasoning. Gross product is
similarly unjustifiable for substitution as it is neither money nor
credit.

However, for the sake of comparison, let us estimate each of the five
options listed above. Base values for the following table are U.S.
Dollar amounts borrowed from Credit Expansion Fallacy. These are
expanded by an [estimate of relative
size](https://seekingalpha.com/article/4202768-u-s-percent-world-stock-market-cap-tops-40-percent)[^927]
of the world economy by equity market capitalization. The U.S. market is
approximately 40% of global markets. Therefore these values exceed U.S.
numbers by a factor of 1/40%. This favors simplicity over precision, as
the only objective is to demonstrate a rational method of estimation.
The amount of Bitcoin assumed is 18,952,500 given 95% mined (\~10 years
future) and 5% lost (e.g. Satoshi lost private keys).

Valuations are based on 2019 numbers though Bitcoin
[inflation](#Inflation) is based on 2029. This implies that values
should be higher based on the assumption of economic growth and U.S.
Dollar [monetary
inflation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation)[^928]. The
latter can be eliminated by considering this a constant 2019 dollar
projection. Assuming 2% annual real [economic
growth](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economic_growth)[^929] compounded
for 10 years, the 2029 values have been increased by \~22%.

  Substitute       Size (2019)             USD/BTC (2029)
  ---------------- ----------------------- ----------------
  Tangible money   \$4,347,460,000,000     \$279,852
  Base Money       \$8,187,102,500,000     \$527,016
  Bank credit      \$36,018,735,000,000    \$2,318,578
  All credit       \$236,812,492,891,206   \$15,243,965
  Gross product    \$80,270,000,000,000    \$5,167,097

The global base money replacement estimate is \$527,016. Determination
of [net present
value](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Net_present_value)[^930] requires
an estimate of capital cost. Using a conservative value of 7.2%
[interest](#Interest)
[implies](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule_of_72)[^931] a 100%
[opportunity
cost](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost)[^932] of
speculation over a \~10 year term, or a present price of \$263,508.

Now we consider the primary assumption, of replacement of all money.
Bitcoin offers [no security](#permissionless-principle)[^933] against
state prohibition of its use in [trade](#Trade). Under the assumption
that states intend to retain
[seigniorage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^934] and
[censorship](#Censorship), we might multiply by the fraction of the
global black market, which is
[estimated](https://voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/7964)[^935] to be \~28%
of the global market. The base money estimate includes *all* market
activity in the money (credit estimates do not). At 100% replacement for
estimated black market trade the price is \$73,782.

However given the assumption that state monies are in exclusive use in
the white market, we cannot assume 100% of black market activity in
Bitcoin. There is no obvious basis for estimating this proportion, but
**the 2019 price of \~\$10,000 implies a projected 2029 black market
adoption of \~7.4%.**

This estimate does not consider the [stability
property](#_Stability_Property)[^936] of Bitcoin. It is possible that
trade would be forced into [monetary
substitutes](#substitution-principle)[^937] before the currently implied
future adoption can be reached.

## Scarcity Fallacy

As an *absolute* concept, economic
[scarcity](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scarcity)[^938] of a resource
implies only that it is not available in limitless supply. Furthermore,
if no [person](#Person) demands even a scarce resource, it has no
[value](#Value). A scarce resource under demand is property. No degree
of difficulty in producing the resource is implied.

Scarcity may also refer to the *relative* availability of some property.
For a given supply, increasing demand implies decreasing availability
(increasing scarcity). However, increasing demand tends to increase
production, and thereby availability. Similarly, for a given demand,
increasing supply implies increasing availability (decreasing scarcity).
However increasing supply tends to decrease production, and thereby
availability. These negative feedbacks stabilize availability and
correspondingly [price](#Price).

A single [coin](#Coin) has [fixed supply](#inflation-principle)[^939].
There is a theory that the fixed supply of Bitcoin is the source of its
value. As with Bitcoin, there is a fixed supply of the [Mona
Lisa](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mona_Lisa)[^940], only one is
possible. The theory implies that this is the source of value for the
famed work of art. However there are countless unique works of art with
no demand, and therefore no value. **Bitcoin cannot increase in value
only because of absolute scarcity.** To the contrary, it necessarily
becomes more scarce as it becomes more highly valued. Prevalence is not
an important monetary property except as it pertains to portability and
divisibility.

An aspect of the theory is that Bitcoin's fixed supply is the source of
its utility because it ensures non-increasing availability. However,
this requires non-decreasing demand. Bitcoin is unique in the realm of
property in that the cost of [transferring](#Transfer) it inherently
increases with demand to do so. This effectively creates the same
[negative demand feedback](#_Stability_Property)[^941] seen in property
without fixed supply.

Unlike the Mona Lisa, it is also subject to [effective
substitution](#substitution-principle)[^942]. Given that non-decreasing
demand is not assured the theory is invalid. As is common with economic
fallacies, the error stems in part from considering just one side of the
supply-demand relation.

Another cause of the error is a misinterpretation of the behavior of
commodity monies. Because of its lower prevalence on the surface of the
Earth, gold has remained more
[portable](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money#Properties)[^943] in
common scenarios than more prevalent materials such as iron and salt.
However the portability of [electronic money](#money-taxonomy)[^944] is
independent of the number of units in existence. Apart from sufficient
divisibility, the total number of Bitcoin units is entirely arbitrary
and therefore unrelated to its utility.

Another cause of the error is a misinterpretation of the behavior of
[state](#State) monies. Through [anti-counterfeit
laws](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Counterfeit_money)[^945] the state
controls the supply of its money by restricting competition. It can
therefore collect an [inflation
tax](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^946] by expanding
supply without consuming as much capital in production, increasing the
ratio of money to capital. Without restricted competition supply would
expand through market forces, in response to demand, eliminating the
tax. In other words the money would behave as a prevalent commodity,
with poor portability (at least until remunerated by the state). Poor
portability is often an actual consequence of hyperinflation.

Scarcity is a function of both supply and demand and therefore cannot be
inherent in a money, even with fixed supply. Both commodity money and
Bitcoin eliminate the inflation tax, though commodity money is subject
to the negative feedback of monetary inflation and Bitcoin is subject to
the negative feedback of fee pressure.

## Stability Property

[Value is
subjective](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value)[^947]
and therefore price constancy is an economic fiction. The
[exchange](#Exchange) [prices](#Price) of a money is determined by its
[supply and
demand](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Supply_and_demand)[^948] which
is in turn affected by the demand schedules of all people for all
products. The stability of a money is not a tendency toward constant
price in all other things, it is a
[damping](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Damping_ratio)[^949]
relationship between demand for the money and its supply.

We can organize monies into three supply categories:

-   Market supply
    ([commodity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commodity)[^950])

-   Monopoly supply ([monopoly](#money-taxonomy)[^951])

-   Fixed supply
    ([bitcoin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bitcoin)[^952])

In any money, destruction of [units](#Unit) decreases supply and
therefore increases the value of those that remain. Given that there is
no financial incentive for loss it does not impact stability.

Commodity money supply increases due to the financial incentive to
[produce more](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_mining)[^953] when
price is expected to be at or above production cost (inclusive of
capital cost). This relationship between price and supply is predictable
despite price (and therefore supply) not being so Competition ensures
that this production, financed by existing [owners](#Owner), is limited
by current price. The feedback of value decrease resulting from supply
increase reduces production incentive, creating stability.

Monopoly money supply is increased arbitrarily (or taxed as
[demurrage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demurrage_(currency))[^954])
by the [sovereign](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sovereignty)[^955] due
to the financial reward of
[seigniorage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage)[^956].

When this monetary inflation is predictable it can be capitalized, which
discounts the return on seigniorage. As such changes to supply are often
[not
published](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-venezuela-economy/crisis-hit-venezuela-halts-publication-of-another-major-indicator-idUSKBN16S1YF)[^957].
Due to state
[monopoly](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/State_monopoly)[^958]
protection (i.e. production is the crime of counterfeit), competition
cannot effectively limit returns. The resulting sovereign
[profit](#Profit) (tax) is the reward of seigniorage and the [reason for
monopoly money](#reservation-principle)[^959]. Monopoly protection is
the sole economic distinction between commodity and monopoly money. The
supply increase caused by seigniorage is mitigated only by political
unrest as [people](#Person) resist the consequential value decrease.
This unrest initially manifests as [capital
flight](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capital_flight)[^960], which is
countered by [foreign exchange
controls](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_exchange_controls)[^961].

As [fees](#Fee) necessarily rise with demand the [utility
threshold](#utility-threshold-property)[^962] eliminates demand for
[transaction](#Transaction) of value below the threshold. More
generally, the fee level rises to the point where [monetary
substitutes](#substitution-principle)[^963] are more cost-effective for
a given value transaction. **Stability therefore results from limiting
demand directly, in contrast to relying on an increase in supply to do
so.** Stability implies that price is bounded, yet it can rise with
increased effective transaction [carrying
capacity](#scalability-principle)[^964] of the [coin](#Coin), and with
increased [utility](#Utility) relative to substitutes.

## Stock to Flow Fallacy

[Stock-to-Flow](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stock_and_flow)[^965]
historically describes the relationship between capital and income,
allowing a future capital level to be estimated from an expected income
level. Later this elemental concept was applied to money supply
generally.

The ratio of stock to flow is a measure of time. Given a higher ratio,
stock will increase more slowly. There is a theory that money with a
higher inherent stock-to-flow ratio will suffer less proportional
[monetary
inflation](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation)[^966]
than a money with a lower ratio. The theory holds that the higher ratio
implies a "harder" money, defined as inherently more resistant to the
effects of monetary inflation.

The theory fails to consider the source of flow rates. It necessarily
assumes that the rate of production is simply a property of the
substance. But production of anything occurs when the anticipated
[price](#Price) makes production profitable. A greater [profit](#Profit)
potential results in more competition, accelerating supply increase.
More people digging for gold increases its flow.

In other words, flow is a function of demand. An anticipated loss
results in no production whatsoever. This lack of any flow is *not
inherent in the substance* but a consequence of *lack of demand*. Given
that both supply and demand determine flow, the theory is invalid. This
[long
understood](https://mises.org/library/theory-money-and-credit/html/ppp/1234)[^967]
error is not an aspect of the elemental stock-to-flow concept, but a
misapplication of it.

Given counterfeit laws, competition to produce [state](#State) money is
restricted, allowing control of supply by the state, independent of
market forces. As with other monies, supply and demand are generally
unpredictable. A state may "peg" its issue of [reserve
notes](#reservation-principle)[^968] to another money, such as gold.
This relation may even hold over many decades. In this case the
stock-to-flow ratio would incorrectly indicate a "hardness" comparable
to that of gold.

**Given that the stock-to-flow of money is the inverted monetary
inflation rate, its relationship with monetary inflation is
tautological.** It does not imply anything about future monetary
inflation. It can be used to analyze historical relations, and to
calculate future stock based on *assumed* future flow, but it cannot be
used to *predict* future monetary inflation. Any statement that one
[speculation](#Speculate) will be more profitable than another based on
historical stock-to-flow ratios is an error.

# Scalability

## Auditability Fallacy

Solvency of a Bitcoin custodian cannot be audited. A custodian is a
[person](#Person) with discretion both in the release of an asset and
issuance of securities against it. If both release of the asset and the
issuance of securities against it are controlled by [consensus
rules](#Consensus_Rules), then the relationship is not actually
custodial. This is the distinction between a
[reserve](#reservation-principle)[^969] and a [layer](#Layering). A
layer is protocol-enforced (non-custodial) and therefore has nothing to
audit.

**A solvency audit requires simultaneous (atomic) proof of both the full
amount of the asset held by a custodian and the securities issued
against it.** In the case of a national Bitcoin reserve this would
require complete proof of all fiat (e.g. the security) issued against
the reserve, as well as the Bitcoin held in reserve. Even in the case
where the security is issued on a distinct public [chain](#Chain) the
atomicity requirement is not satisfied.

In some cases it may be considered sufficient to waive the atomicity
requirement, accepting incorrectness under the assumption that material
deviation would eventually be discovered. However in the case of [state
banking](#reserve-currency-fallacy)[^970] it is insufficient to detect
the deviation. Historically it has not been difficult to detect such
deviations. The difficulty arises in stopping them.

## Scalability Principle

[Scalability](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scalability)[^971] is the
proportional increase in some aspect of performance as more hardware is
employed. Bitcoin [transaction](#Transaction) throughput is perfectly
non-scalable as no amount of hardware increases it.

![](media/image86.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

The [block](#Block) size limit [consensus rule](#Consensus_Rules)
establishes the arbitrary trade-off between [utility](#Utility) and
system security. Increased block size marginally increases
[transaction](#Transaction) throughput and therefore the resource cost
of transaction [validation](#Validation) (i.e. processing, storage, and
bandwidth). As the cost of validation increases, [economic](#Economy)
security is adversely impacted by increased [centralization
risk](#centralization-risk)[^972]. As the trade-off is arbitrary, there
is no ideal size.

![](media/image88.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

At any block size the system remains non-scalable due to the necessity
of [confirmation](#Confirmation) finality. A finite set of transactions
must be selected, which implies that others may be excluded. This
exclusion is financially motivated by the [opportunity
cost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost)[^973] of not
utilizing deployed [mining](#Mine) capital, and is the manifestation of
non-scalability. This inherent limit necessitates a competitive
[market](#Market) for confirmation, and finances it in proportion to
demand for the [money](#money-taxonomy)[^974].

![](media/image90.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

Effective transaction carrying capacity, and therefore utility, can be
increased by [layering](#Layering). This represents a *local* and
*time-limited* security compromise, in contrast to the *system-wide* and
*persistent* security compromise of increasing block size.

![](media/image92.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

Either compromise lowers but does not eliminate the [utility
threshold](#utility-threshold-property)[^975], which implies the
[stability property](#_Stability_Property)[^976] is preserved.

![](media/image94.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

**Therefore stability and non-scalability exist at any block size and
level of layering.**

## Substitution Principle

A [substitute
good](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Substitute_good)[^977] is one that
can be used in place of another. As the [price](#Price) of a product
rises, at some level [people](#Person) either move to substitutes or
cease use altogether.

While a substitute would be less desirable at the same price as the
original product, its lower price offsets this preference. In this
manner the presence of substitutes reduces demand for the original good.
The substitute competes with the original just as does increased
[supply](#Supply) of the original.

Given that a [coin](#Coin) has fixed supply, it is commonly assumed that
no supply side increase can reduce upward price pressure. As shown in
[Stability Property](#_Stability_Property)[^978], Bitcoin integrates
transfer [fees](#Fee) which necessarily rise with use. This unique
characteristic creates downward price pressure by reducing demand. **But
this rising cost also makes substitutes viable, creating downward price
pressure by effectively increasing supply.**

There is nothing preventing the evolution of multiple similar coins. It
is possible for these to exhibit nearly indistinguishable monetary
properties, minimizing the substitution trade-off. As shown in
[Consolidation Principle](#consolidation-principle)[^979], there is
always pressure toward a single money, as this eliminates the
[exchange](#Exchange) cost. However this pressure is at odds with rising
costs, and at some level of use must give way to substitution (or
disuse).

There is a theory that since creation of new coins costs nothing, the
substitution principle implies that Bitcoin must become worthless due to
unlimited free supply. This ignores the fact that Bitcoin requires
people pay to use it. This is as true for a second coin as it is for the
first.

And increasing supply relieves demand. At some point demand is not
sufficient to produce/secure more supply, and as such the theory is
invalid. This is the same relationship that holds with commodity monies
and indeed all products.

## Utility Threshold Property

[Utility](\l) is expressed as preference for the [coin](#Coin) over
substitutes, for [transfers](#Transfer) of a comparable [value](#Value).
Increasing utility implies a rising [fee](#Fee) level, given the
presumption of increasing [transaction](#Transaction) volume.
Competition for [confirmation](#Confirmation) bids up fees. Given
differences in the [market](#Market) fee [price](#Price) over time, one
may offer an uncompetitive fee in expectation of a longer time to
confirm. Others will not transact on the [chain](#Chain), relying
instead on substitutes.

![](media/image96.png){width="5.310416666666667in"
height="1.836111111111111in"}

Increasing utility therefore implies increasing average transfer value,
as rising fees will otherwise cause the cost of transfer to exceed the
value transferred. Greater [depth](#Depth) implies greater confirmation
security. Therefore time can be traded for *higher* security against
[double-spend](#Double_Spend). However time cannot be reduced below one
block period to achieve *lower* security. The lowest levels of security
are none ([unconfirmed](#Unconfirmed)) and minimal (one confirmation).
There is no trade to be made between these levels.

Higher fees imply higher [hash rate](#Hash_Rate) cost mitigating the
need to increase confirmation depth for higher value transfers. **But
given there is no way to reduce security for lower value transfers, the
useful minimum value transfer rises with utility.** Failure to support
transfers in a certain value range implies substitutes are cheaper in
that range. This implies the possibility of coexisting moneys to service
distinct value ranges. However all [Bitcoins](#bitcoin-labels)[^980]
inherently exhibit this property.

[Rule](#Rule) differences in terms of [block](#Block) [period](#Period)
or size do not change this relationship. The effect of these coin
variations is strictly proportional. Even unlimited size blocks must
produce fee levels that price out low value transfers.

# Appendix

## Glossary of Terms

Activation

Starting to [Enforce](#Enforcement) a new [Rule](#Rule).

[]{#Adjustment .anchor}Adjustment

A change to [Difficulty](#Difficulty).

[]{#Aggregation .anchor}Aggregation

The tendency toward reduced participation in [Mining](#Mine) or
[Validation](#Validation). Implies [Pooling](#Political) or
[Centralization](#Centralization).

[]{#Announcement .anchor}Announcement

The first [Communication](#Communication) of a [Block](#Block) to
another [Person](#Person).

Apparent Hash Power

A fraction of [Blocks](#Block) in a [Chain](#Chain) [Segment](#Segment).
Public estimates of specific [Miner](#Miner) [Hash Power](#Hash_Power)
are based on this.

[]{#Attack .anchor}Attack

Use of [Hash Power](#Hash_Power) to enable
[Double-Spending](#Double_Spend).

[]{#Bitcoin .anchor}Bitcoin

The set of principles that secure a [Coin](#Coin) from the
[State](#State). The term and principles are defined by Satoshi in
"Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System".

[]{#Block .anchor}Block

A [Valid](#Validity) set of [Transactions](#Transaction) with
[Timestamp](#Timestamp) and [Proof](#Proof).

Block Pool

The set of [Weak](#Weak) [Blocks](#Block). Orphan Pool is a misnomer for
this.

[]{#Borrow .anchor}Borrow

To [Trade](#Trade) time with [Units](#Unit) for property of greater
[Utility](#Utility) to the Lender.

[]{#Branch .anchor}Branch

A [Valid](#Validity) sequence of [Blocks](#Block).

[]{#Candidate .anchor}Candidate

A potential [Block](#Block) with undetermined [Proof](#Proof).

Cap

The limit to [Supply](#Supply) over all time.

[]{#Capitalization .anchor}Capitalization

The product of [Price](#Price) and [Supply](#Supply).

[]{#Censorship .anchor}Censorship

Subjective [Confirmation](#Confirmation).

[]{#Centralization .anchor}Centralization

The tendency toward few [Merchants](#Merchant). Merchants directly
control [Validation](#Validation). May also refer to
[Pooling](#Political).

[]{#Chain .anchor}Chain

The [Branch](#Branch) with the most cumulative [Proof](#Proof).

[]{#Claimant .anchor}Claimant

A [Person](#Person) who holds a claim on property under the control of a
[Custodian](#Custodian). Also, a lien-holder, shareholder,
[lender](#Lend), or depositor.

Client-Server

An asymmetrical [Protocol](#Proof_Of_Stake).

[]{#Coercion .anchor}Coercion

Use of aggression to compel [Activation](#glossary-of-terms).

[]{#Coin .anchor}Coin

A [Consensus](#Consensus) regarding a mutually acceptable medium for
[Trade](#Trade). BTC is a [Coin](#Coin).

[]{#Coinbase .anchor}Coinbase

A [Transaction](#Transaction) that [Transfers](#Transfer) a
[Reward](#Reward).

[]{#Communication .anchor}Communication

Conveyance of data between [Machines](#Machine).

[]{#Confirmation .anchor}Confirmation

Inclusion of a [Transaction](#Transaction) in a [Block](#Block).

[]{#Consensus .anchor}Consensus

An agreement among [People](#Person). Also, the set of people who
participate in an agreement.

[]{#Consensus_Rules .anchor}Consensus Rules

The set of constraints that define a [Coin](#Coin).

[]{#Contract .anchor}Contract

A [Script](#Script) that expresses [Transfer](#Transfer) conditions.
Public Key Script is an anachronism for this.

[]{#Co_option .anchor}Co-option

Use of aggression to control [Hash Power](#Hash_Power).

Correlation

The ability to [Taint](#Taint) using statistical [Chain](#Chain)
analysis.

[]{#Custodian .anchor}Custodian

A [Person](#Custodian) who controls the property of another by
agreement.

[]{#Decentralization .anchor}Decentralization

The tendency opposing [Centralization](#Centralization).

Decouple

A [Mine](#Mine) that shares [Reward](#Reward) with another to reduce
[Variance](#Variance).

[]{#Delegation .anchor}Delegation

The tendency toward few [Owners](#Owner). Owners directly control
[Spending](#Spend).

[]{#Denial_of_Service .anchor}Denial of Service

Using [Communication](#Communication) to exploit
[Protocol](#Proof_Of_Stake) or [Implementation](#Implementation) flaws
that degrade performance. DoS is an acronym for this.

[]{#Depth .anchor}Depth

One more than the count of [Blocks](#Block) after a
[Confirmation](#Confirmation).

Developer

A [Person](#Person) creating an [Implementation](#Implementation).

[]{#Difficulty .anchor}Difficulty

The level of [Proof](#Proof) required for [Validity](#Validity).

[]{#Distortion .anchor}Distortion

[Market](#Market) aggression that skews the cost of [Mining](#Mine).

[]{#Double_Spend .anchor}Double-Spend

The [Endorsement](#Endorsement) of the same [Output](#Output)
[Contract](#Contract) by distinct [Spends](#Spend).

Dust

An insufficient number of [Units](#Unit) for [Transfer](#Transfer) via
an [Output](#Output). BTC [Consensus Rules](#Consensus_Rules) prohibit
transfer of less than one unit.

Economic Power

A fraction of all property offered in [Exchange](#Exchange).

[]{#Economy .anchor}Economy

The set of all [Merchants](#Merchant).

[]{#Endorsement .anchor}Endorsement

A [Script](#Script) that satisfies a [Contract](#Contract). Signature
Script is an anachronism for this.

[]{#Enforcement .anchor}Enforcement

The act of discarding [Invalid](#Validity) data.

[]{#Exchange .anchor}Exchange

The [Trade](#Trade) of [Units](#Unit) for other property.

[]{#Fee .anchor}Fee

An implicit [Transfer](#Transfer) to a [Miner](#Miner).

[]{#Fork .anchor}Fork

A divergence in [Consensus Rules](#Consensus_Rules).

[]{#Genesis .anchor}Genesis

The first [Block](#Block) of all [Branches](#Branch) of a [Coin](#Coin).

[]{#Grind .anchor}Grind

A [Tool](#Tool) that performs [Hashing](#Hash).

[]{#Grinder .anchor}Grinder

A [Person](#Person) operating a [Grind](#Grind).

[]{#Halving .anchor}Halving

A reduction in the [Subsidy](#Subsidy) rate (by half).

[]{#Hard_Fork .anchor}Hard Fork

A [Fork](#Fork) that implies a [Split](#Split). Expansion of the set of
potentially-[Valid](#Validity) [Blocks](#Block).

[]{#Hash .anchor}Hash

An atomic computation to [Prove](#Proof) [Candidate](#Candidate)
[Validity](#Validity).

[]{#Hash_Power .anchor}Hash Power

A fraction of the [Hash Rate](#Hash_Rate) of all [Mines](#Mine).

[]{#Hash_Rate .anchor}Hash Rate

The rate of [Hashing](#Hash).

[]{#Height .anchor}Height

The count of preceding [Blocks](#Block) in a [Branch](#Branch).

[]{#Hoard .anchor}Hoard

To [Own](#Owner) for future use.

[]{#Honest .anchor}Honest

A [Miner](#Miner) who builds on the [Blocks](#Block) of others.

[]{#Identity .anchor}Identity

The means to associate [Communication](#Communication) with a
[Person](#Person).

[]{#Implementation .anchor}Implementation

A specific [Tool](#Tool) set.

[]{#Inflation .anchor}Inflation

The increase in [Supply](#Supply) resulting from [Subsidy](#Subsidy). A
monetary inflation, not to be confused with [Price
Inflation](#Price_Inflation).

[]{#Input .anchor}Input

An [Output](#Output) [Point](#Point) and an [Endorsement](#Endorsement).

[]{#Interest .anchor}Interest

The rate of increase in [Utility](#Utility) from [Lending](#Lend).

[]{#Latency .anchor}Latency

The delay inherent in [Communication](#Communication).

[]{#Layering .anchor}Layering

Trade using a sequence of [Unconfirmed](#Confirmation)
[Transactions](#Transaction) that can be [Settled](#Settlement) by
either party.

[]{#Lend .anchor}Lend

To [Trade](#Trade) time without [Units](#Unit) for property of greater
[Utility](#Utility). [Invest](#Lend) is an alias for this.

Locktime

An expression of earliest [Transaction](#Transaction)
[Validity](#Validity).

[]{#Loss .anchor}Loss

Failure of [Investment](#Lend) to earn the [Market](#Market) rate of
[Interest](#Interest).

[]{#Machine .anchor}Machine

An instruction follower.

[]{#Majority_Hash_Power .anchor}Majority Hash Power

A subset of [Miners](#Miner) with sufficient [Hash Power](#Hash_Power)
to execute a sustained [Attack](#Attack). 51% is a common approximation
of sufficient power.

[]{#Market .anchor}Market

The [Trade](#Trade) in certain property.

[]{#Maturity .anchor}Maturity

The [Depth](#Depth) at which a [Coinbase](#Coinbase) [Output](#Output)
becomes [Transferable](#Transfer).

Median Time Past

An average of preceding [Block](#Block) [Timestamps](#Timestamp).

[]{#Merchant .anchor}Merchant

A [Person](#Person) accepting [Units](#Unit) in [Trade](#Trade). User is
a common alias for this.

[]{#Mine .anchor}Mine

A [Tool](#Tool) that performs [Work](#Work).

[]{#Miner .anchor}Miner

A [Person](#Person) operating a [Mine](#Mine).

[]{#Node .anchor}Node

A [Tool](#Tool) that performs [Validation](#Validation).

[]{#Operation .anchor}Operation

An atomic declaration of intent.

Optimization

A [Tool](#Tool) change that reduces the cost of [Mining](#Mine).

[]{#Organization .anchor}Organization

An [Announcement](#Announcement) adding a [Block](#Block) to the
[Chain](#Chain).

[]{#Output .anchor}Output

An explicit [Transfer](#Transfer) and a [Contract](#Contract).

[]{#Owner .anchor}Owner

A [Person](#Person) controlling certain [Units](#Unit). Holder is a
common alias for this.

[]{#Partition .anchor}Partition

An inability of certain [Nodes](#Node) to [Communicate](#Communication).

[]{#Partitioning .anchor}Partitioning

The tendency toward persistent [Partitions](#Partitioning).

[]{#Peer_to_Peer .anchor}Peer-to-Peer

A symmetrical [Protocol](#Proof_Of_Stake).

[]{#Period .anchor}Period

The average time between [Organizations](#Organization).

[]{#Person .anchor}Person

A decision maker.

[]{#Point .anchor}Point

A reference to an [Output](#Output) or [Input](#Input).

Political

Pertaining to the actions of [States](#State).

[]{#Political .anchor}Pooling

The tendency toward few [Miners](#Miner), including consolidation by
[Relays](#Relay).

[]{#Power .anchor}Power

The relative level of control of a [Person](#Person) over the
[Chain](#Chain) or [Coin](#Coin).

Previous Output

The [Output](#Output) to which an [Input](#Input) refers.

[]{#Price .anchor}Price

An average or instantaneous [Exchange](#Exchange) rate.

[]{#Price_Inflation .anchor}Price Inflation

The increase in [Price](#Price) over time.

[]{#Profit .anchor}Profit

A return on [Investment](#Lend) above the [Market](#Market) rate of
[Interest](#Interest).

[]{#Proof .anchor}Proof

[Valid](#Validity) evidence.

[]{#Proof_of_Memory .anchor}Proof-of-Memory

Probabilistic [Proof](#Proof) of an amount of usable computing memory
(PoM).

[]{#Proof_Of_Stake .anchor}Proof-Of-Stake

Cryptographic [Proof](#Proof) of an amount of [Ownership](#Owner) (PoS).

[]{#Proof_Of_Work .anchor}Proof-Of-Work

Probabilistic [Proof](#Proof) of an amount of [Work](#Work) performed
(PoW).

Protocol

A set of [Communication](#Communication) conventions.

[]{#Relay .anchor}Relay

A [Tool](#Tool) that disseminates new [Blocks](#Block).

[]{#Relayer .anchor}Relayer

A [Person](#Person) operating a [Relay](#Relay).

Reorganization

An [Announcement](#Announcement) promoting a [Weak](#Weak)
[Branch](#Branch) to the [Chain](#Chain). Reorg is an abbreviation for
this.

[]{#Reward .anchor}Reward

The sum of [Subsidy](#Subsidy) and [Fees](#Fee) for a [Block](#Block).

[]{#Rule .anchor}Rule

A subset of [Consensus Rules](#Consensus_Rules).

[]{#Script .anchor}Script

A set of [Operations](#Operation) that authorizes [Transfer](#Transfer).

[]{#Segment .anchor}Segment

A contiguous subset of a [Branch](#Branch).

[]{#Selfish .anchor}Selfish

A [Miner](#Miner) who is not being [Honest](#Honest).

[]{#Settlement .anchor}Settlement

[Confirmation](#Confirmation) of [Layered](#Layering)
[Transactions](#Transaction).

[]{#Signal .anchor}Signal

A [Miner](#Miner) indication via [Block](#Block) data of intent to
[Enforce](#Enforcement) a new [Rule](#Rule).

[]{#Soft_Fork .anchor}Soft Fork

A [Fork](#Fork) that implies a [Split](#Split) unless
[Enforced](#Enforcement) by [Majority Hash Power](#Majority_Hash_Power).
Contraction of the set of potentially-[Valid](#Validity)
[Blocks](#Block).

[]{#Speculate .anchor}Speculate

To [Own](#Owner) in expectation of [Price](#Price) increase. Also to
[Borrow](#Borrow) in expectation of price decrease.

[]{#Spend .anchor}Spend

The initial publication of a [Transaction](#Transaction).

[]{#Split .anchor}Split

A [Coin](#Coin) bifurcation.

[]{#Stall .anchor}Stall

The lack of [Height](#Height) increase over time.

[]{#State .anchor}State

A set of [People](#Person) that uses aggression in place of
[Trade](#Trade). Typically operates with impunity within geographic
limits.

[]{#Strong .anchor}Strong

A [Branch](#Branch) with more cumulative [Proof](#Proof) than another.

[]{#Subsidy .anchor}Subsidy

The issuance of new [Units](#Unit) to a [Miner](#Miner).

[]{#Supply .anchor}Supply

The set of all issued [Units](#Unit).

[]{#Taint .anchor}Taint

Determination of [Ownership](#Owner).

[]{#Timestamp .anchor}Timestamp

A declaration of the time of [Block](#Block) production.

[]{#Tool .anchor}Tool

A set of [Machine](#Machine) instructions.

[]{#Trade .anchor}Trade

A voluntary swap of property between two [People](#Person).

[]{#Transaction .anchor}Transaction

A [Valid](#Validity) record of [Transfer](#Transfer).

Transaction Pool

The set of [Unconfirmed](#Confirmation) [Transactions](#Transaction).
Memory Pool is a misnomer for this.

[]{#Transfer .anchor}Transfer

The change of control over certain Units.

[]{#Unconfirmed .anchor}Unconfirmed

A [Transaction](#Transaction) that does not exist in a [Block](#Block)
on the [Chain](#Chain).

[]{#Unit .anchor}Unit

A minimum [Transferable](#Transfer) amount of property represented by a
[Coin](#Coin). The satoshi is the Bitcoin unit.

[]{#Utility .anchor}Utility

The usefulness of certain property to a [Person](#Person).

[]{#Validation .anchor}Validation

The process of determining [Validity](#Validity).

[]{#Validity .anchor}Validity

Conformance to [Consensus Rules](#Consensus_Rules).

[]{#Value .anchor}Value

The preference of a [Person](#Person) for certain property over other.

[]{#Variance .anchor}Variance

The varying frequency of achieving a [Reward](#Reward).

[]{#Variation .anchor}Variation

Differences in the resource cost of [Mining](#Mine).

Volatility

Deviation in [Price](#Price) over time.

Wallet

A [Tool](#Tool) that creates [Transactions](#Transaction).

[]{#Weak .anchor}Weak

A [Branch](#Branch) with less cumulative [Proof](#Proof) than another.
Orphan is a misnomer for this.

[]{#Withholding .anchor}Withholding

The purposeful delay of [Announcement](#Announcement).

[]{#Work .anchor}Work

The process of [Block](#Block) production.

[^1]: https://libbitcoin.info

[^2]: https://rpi.edu

[^3]: http://desktopstandard.com

[^4]: https://microsoft.com

[^5]: https://beyondtrust.com

[^6]: https://veritascapital.com

[^7]: https://www.navy.mil

[^8]: https://cryptoecon.org

[^9]: https://libbitcoininstitute.org

[^10]: https://bitbikers.org

[^11]: https://libbitcoin.info

[^12]: https://bitcoincore.org

[^13]: Chapter: Dedicated Cost Principle

[^14]: https://www.dtu.dk/english

[^15]: https://twitter.com

[^16]: https://libbitcoin.info

[^17]: https://github.com/libbitcoin/libbitcoin-system/wiki/Cryptoeconomics

[^18]: Chapter: Inflation Principle

[^19]: Chapter: Savings Relation

[^20]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amir_Taaki

[^21]: Chapter: Foreword

[^22]: https://microsoft.com

[^23]: https://cs.illinois.edu

[^24]: https://bh2019.hodlhodl.com

[^25]: https://www.activism.net/cypherpunk/manifesto.html

[^26]: https://libbitcoininstitute.org

[^27]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_Software_Foundation

[^28]: https://www.irs.gov/charities-non-profits/charitable-organizations/exemption-requirements-501c3-organizations

[^29]: Chapter: Value Proposition

[^30]: https://cryptoecon.org

[^31]: https://www.hodl.capital

[^32]: https://lemniscap.com

[^33]: https://building-on-bitcoin.com

[^34]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crypto-anarchism

[^35]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Action_axiom

[^36]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_preference

[^37]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule_of_inference

[^38]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptocurrency

[^39]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/R/K_selection_theory

[^40]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/R/K_selection_theory\#r-selection

[^41]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/R/K_selection_theory\#K-selection

[^42]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red_Queen_hypothesis

[^43]: https://github.com/libbitcoin

[^44]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Twitter

[^45]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Consistency

[^46]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catallactics

[^47]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Praxeology

[^48]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Austrian_School

[^49]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economic_rationalism

[^50]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deductive_reasoning

[^51]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axiom

[^52]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ludwig_von_Mises

[^53]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Murray_Rothbard

[^54]: Chapter: Inflation Principle

[^55]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^56]: Chapter: Full Reserve Fallacy

[^57]: Chapter: Censorship Resistance Property

[^58]: Chapter: Depreciation Principle

[^59]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Austrian_School

[^60]: https://twitter.com/100trillionusd

[^61]: https://libbitcoin.info

[^62]: https://bitcoinfoundation.org

[^63]: https://www.navy.mil

[^64]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_Navy_Strike_Fighter_Tactics_Instructor_program

[^65]: https://www.globalsecurity.org/military/library/policy/navy/ntsp/SFTS.htm

[^66]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joint_Strike_Fighter_program

[^67]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guided_bomb\#Satellite

[^68]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/McDonnell_Douglas_F/A-18_Hornet

[^69]: https://www.rpi.edu

[^70]: https://ibm.com

[^71]: https://microsoft.com

[^72]: https://www.veritascapital.com

[^73]: https://www.uspto.gov

[^74]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chief_technology_officer

[^75]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CERT_Coordination_Center

[^76]: https://dhs.gov

[^77]: https://oval.cisecurity.org

[^78]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axiom

[^79]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euclidean_geometry

[^80]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zermelo%E2%80%93Fraenkel_set_theory

[^81]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Probability_axioms

[^82]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catallactics

[^83]: http://satoshi.nakamotoinstitute.org/emails/cryptography/4

[^84]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spherical_geometry

[^85]: Chapter: Permissionless Principle

[^86]: Chapter: Censorship Resistance Property

[^87]: Chapter: Hearn Error

[^88]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Confinity

[^89]: Chapter: Value Proposition

[^90]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PayPal

[^91]: Chapter: Risk Sharing Principle

[^92]: Chapter: Proof of Work Fallacy

[^93]: Chapter: Side Fee Fallacy

[^94]: Chapter: Axiom of Resistance

[^95]: Chapter: Qualitative Security Model

[^96]: Chapter: Pooling Pressure Risk

[^97]: Chapter: Risk Sharing Principle

[^98]: https://bitcoin.org/en/wallets/web

[^99]: Chapter: Threat Level Paradox

[^100]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_exchange_controls

[^101]: Chapter: Risk Sharing Principle

[^102]: Chapter: Threat Level Paradox

[^103]: Chapter: Balance of Power Fallacy

[^104]: Chapter: Pooling Pressure Risk

[^105]: http://www.imf.org/external/index.htm

[^106]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^107]: Chapter: Threat Level Paradox

[^108]: https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/09/big-in-venezuela/534177/

[^109]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_exchange_controls

[^110]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hung_jury

[^111]: Chapter: Fragmentation Principle

[^112]: Chapter: Consolidation Principle

[^113]: Chapter: Risk Sharing Principle

[^114]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptocurrency

[^115]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamics\_(mechanics)

[^116]: Chapter: Risk Sharing Principle

[^117]: Chapter: Proof of Stake Fallacy

[^118]: Chapter: Censorship Resistance Property

[^119]: Chapter: Axiom of Resistance

[^120]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^121]: Chapter: Reservation Principle

[^122]: Chapter: Fragmentation Principle

[^123]: Chapter: Blockchain Fallacy

[^124]: Chapter: Axiom of Resistance

[^125]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cognitive_dissonance

[^126]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Rage_quit

[^127]: Chapter: Dumping Fallacy

[^128]: Chapter: Qualitative Security Model

[^129]: Chapter: Inflation Principle

[^130]: Chapter: Lunar Fallacy

[^131]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_market

[^132]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rogue_state

[^133]: Chapter: Hearn Error

[^134]: Chapter: Value Proposition

[^135]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_embargoes

[^136]: Chapter: Other Means Principle

[^137]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^138]: https://www.imf.org

[^139]: Chapter: Pooling Pressure Risk

[^140]: Chapter: Axiom of Resistance

[^141]: Chapter: Risk Sharing Principle

[^142]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^143]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^144]: Chapter: Qualitative Security Model

[^145]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^146]: Chapter: Hearn Error

[^147]: Chapter: Fedcoin Objectives

[^148]: Chapter: Public Data Principle

[^149]: Chapter: Proof of Work Fallacy

[^150]: Chapter: Other Means Principle

[^151]: Chapter: Censorship Resistance Property

[^152]: https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Carl_von_Clausewitz

[^153]: Chapter: Threat Level Paradox

[^154]: https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/1075

[^155]: Chapter: Pooling Pressure Risk

[^156]: https://www.asicboost.com/patent

[^157]: Chapter: Axiom of Resistance

[^158]: Chapter: Risk Sharing Principle

[^159]: Chapter: Public Data Principle

[^160]: Chapter: Qualitative Security Model

[^161]: Chapter: Threat Level Paradox

[^162]: Chapter: Cryptodynamic Principles

[^163]: Chapter: Value Proposition

[^164]: Chapter: Other Means Principle

[^165]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prisoner%27s_dilemma

[^166]: https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/what-are-economic-sanctions

[^167]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reserve_currency

[^168]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ordinal_utility

[^169]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value

[^170]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tie\_(draw)

[^171]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign-exchange_reserves

[^172]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^173]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strategic_dominance

[^174]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clearing\_(finance)

[^175]: https://www.gold.org/about-gold/history-of-gold/the-gold-standard

[^176]: https://coinweek.com/bullion-report/bitcoin-vs-gold-10-crystal-clear-comparisons

[^177]: Chapter: Stability Property

[^178]: Chapter: Proximity Premium Flaw

[^179]: Chapter: Risk Sharing Principle

[^180]: Chapter: Balance of Power Fallacy

[^181]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/False_dilemma

[^182]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perfect_competition

[^183]: Chapter: Threat Level Paradox

[^184]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anonymizer

[^185]: Chapter: Side Fee Fallacy

[^186]: Chapter: Social Network Principle

[^187]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graph\_(discrete_mathematics)\#Directed_graph

[^188]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goodwill\_(accounting)

[^189]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coefficient_of_variation

[^190]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Null_graph

[^191]: Chapter: Axiom of Resistance

[^192]: Chapter: Public Data Principle

[^193]: Chapter: Balance of Power Fallacy

[^194]: Chapter: Cockroach Fallacy

[^195]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blockchain

[^196]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptography

[^197]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_and_open-source_software

[^198]: Chapter: Prisoner's Dilemma Fallacy

[^199]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liberty_Reserve

[^200]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ross_Ulbricht

[^201]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BitTorrent

[^202]: https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/09/big-in-venezuela/534177

[^203]: Chapter: Axiom of Resistance

[^204]: http://web.cs.ucla.edu/classes/cs217/Baran64.pdf

[^205]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^206]: Chapter: Risk Sharing Principle

[^207]: Chapter: Axiom of Resistance

[^208]: Chapter: Zero Sum Property

[^209]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subsidy

[^210]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_market

[^211]: https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/09/big-in-venezuela/534177

[^212]: Chapter: Axiom of Resistance

[^213]: Chapter: Pooling Pressure Risk

[^214]: Chapter: Risk Sharing Principle

[^215]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Attack_surface

[^216]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_exchange_controls

[^217]: Chapter: Centralization Risk

[^218]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^219]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_exchange_controls

[^220]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Know_your_customer

[^221]: https://www.federalreserve.gov/faqs/about_12799.htm

[^222]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^223]: Chapter: Scalability Principle

[^224]: Chapter: Risk Sharing Principle

[^225]: Chapter: Axiom of Resistance

[^226]: Chapter: Value Proposition

[^227]: Chapter: Other Means Principle

[^228]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^229]: Chapter: Axiom of Resistance

[^230]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^231]: Chapter: Risk Sharing Principle

[^232]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflation

[^233]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^234]: Chapter: Depreciation Principle

[^235]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^236]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value

[^237]: Chapter: Time Preference Fallacy

[^238]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marginal_utility

[^239]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Murray_Rothbard

[^240]: https://mises.org/library/what-has-government-done-our-money/html/p/81

[^241]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fisher_hypothesis

[^242]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real_interest_rate

[^243]: https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/ppp/1393

[^244]: Chapter: Reserve Definition

[^245]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reserve_currency

[^246]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Settlement\_(finance)

[^247]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commodity_money

[^248]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^249]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_exchange_controls

[^250]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^251]: https://www.investopedia.com/articles/personal-finance/081616/understanding-taxes-physical-goldsilver-investments.asp

[^252]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflation

[^253]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation

[^254]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exchange_rate\#Parallel_exchange_rate

[^255]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coinage_Act_of_1834

[^256]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_Reserve_Act

[^257]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nixon_shock

[^258]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representative_money

[^259]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_reserve

[^260]: https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/IR-Position/Pages/01042019.aspx

[^261]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Promissory_note

[^262]: https://www.reuters.com/article/us-venezuela-economy/venezuela-loosens-currency-exchange-controls-to-allow-forex-trading-idUSKCN1SD2NC

[^263]: Chapter: Reserve Currency Fallacy

[^264]: https://wiki.mises.org/wiki/Money_substitutes

[^265]: Chapter: Reservation Principle

[^266]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^267]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation

[^268]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Promissory_note

[^269]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Currency

[^270]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Negotiable_instrument

[^271]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Legal_tender

[^272]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantitative_easing

[^273]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^274]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gresham%27s_law

[^275]: Chapter: Fedcoin Objectives

[^276]: Chapter: Censorship Resistance Property

[^277]: Chapter: Axiom of Resistance

[^278]: Chapter: Cryptodynamic Principles

[^279]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lender_of_last_resort

[^280]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_banking

[^281]: Chapter: Thin Air Fallacy

[^282]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_bank

[^283]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discount_window

[^284]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Structure_of_the_Federal_Reserve_System

[^285]: https://www.frbdiscountwindow.org/pages/discount-rates/current-discount-rates

[^286]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^287]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federal_Reserve

[^288]: https://www.newyorkfed.org/aboutthefed/fedpoint/fed01.html

[^289]: https://www.moneyfactory.gov/

[^290]: https://www.federalreserve.gov/faqs/currency_12771.htm

[^291]: https://www.moneyfactory.gov/hmimpaperandink.html

[^292]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coin

[^293]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Use_value

[^294]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gresham%27s_law

[^295]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation

[^296]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Set-off\_(law)\#Close_out_netting

[^297]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_Treasury_security

[^298]: https://www.stlouisfed.org/in-plain-english/a-closer-look-at-open-market-operations

[^299]: https://wiki.mises.org/wiki/Money_substitutes

[^300]: https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/TREAST

[^301]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commodity_money

[^302]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyperinflation_in_Venezuelahttps:/en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zimbabwean_dollar

[^303]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zimbabwean_dollar

[^304]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automated_teller_machine

[^305]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bank_teller

[^306]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_supply\#United_States

[^307]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_supply\#Money_creation_by_commercial_banks

[^308]: https://tradingeconomics.com/united-states/money-supply-m0

[^309]: https://www.stlouisfed.org/on-the-economy/2018/september/fed-payments-treasury-rising-interest-rates

[^310]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Counterfeit

[^311]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^312]: https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2013/12/16/how-tight-jeans-almost-ruined-americas-money

[^313]: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/21/business/sweden-cashless-society.html

[^314]: Chapter: Fedcoin Objectives

[^315]: https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/payments\--cash/e-krona

[^316]: Chapter: Reserve Currency Fallacy

[^317]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_standard

[^318]: Chapter: Value Proposition

[^319]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Application-specific_integrated_circuit

[^320]: https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/1059

[^321]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economies_of_scale

[^322]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rate_of_return

[^323]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unit_price

[^324]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marginal_utility

[^325]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_preference

[^326]: Chapter: Pooling Pressure Risk

[^327]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Separation_of_powers

[^328]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orthogonality

[^329]: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf

[^330]: Chapter: Risk Sharing Principle

[^331]: https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/bios/board/default.htm

[^332]: Chapter: Axiom of Resistance

[^333]: https://www.coindesk.com/uasf-revisited-will-bitcoins-user-revolt-leave-lasting-legacy

[^334]: Chapter: Proof of Work Fallacy

[^335]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waste

[^336]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gas_flare

[^337]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost

[^338]: https://bitcoinist.com/bitcoin-mining-waste-oil-industry

[^339]: Chapter: Efficiency Paradox

[^340]: Chapter: Stability Property

[^341]: Chapter: Qualitative Security Model

[^342]: Chapter: Variance Discount Flaw

[^343]: Chapter: Censorship Resistance Property

[^344]: Chapter: Axiom of Resistance

[^345]: Chapter: Pooling Pressure Risk

[^346]: Chapter: Relay Fallacy

[^347]: Chapter: Censorship Resistance Property

[^348]: Chapter: Efficiency Paradox

[^349]: http://primecoin.io

[^350]: https://eprint.iacr.org/2017/791.pdf

[^351]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paradox

[^352]: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf

[^353]: Chapter: Zero Sum Property

[^354]: Chapter: Pooling Pressure Risk

[^355]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marginal_cost

[^356]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost

[^357]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monotonic_function

[^358]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^359]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Store_of_value

[^360]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value

[^361]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proof-of-stake

[^362]: Chapter: Proof of Stake Fallacy

[^363]: Chapter: Utility Threshold Property

[^364]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^365]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost

[^366]: Chapter: Side Fee Fallacy

[^367]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Step_function

[^368]: http://www.investopedia.com/terms/e/economicprofit.asp

[^369]: Chapter: Pooling Pressure Risk

[^370]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_preference

[^371]: Chapter: Proof of Work Fallacy

[^372]: Chapter: Balance of Power Fallacy

[^373]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red_herring

[^374]: Chapter: Risk Sharing Principle

[^375]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^376]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_exchange_controls

[^377]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero-sum_game

[^378]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Win-win_game

[^379]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chaos_theory

[^380]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_preference

[^381]: Chapter: Side Fee Fallacy

[^382]: Chapter: Pooling Pressure Risk

[^383]: Chapter: Zero Sum Property

[^384]: Chapter: Threat Level Paradox

[^385]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dividend

[^386]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Present_value

[^387]: Chapter: Balance of Power Fallacy

[^388]: Chapter: Proximity Premium Flaw

[^389]: Chapter: Variance Discount Flaw

[^390]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economies_of_scale

[^391]: Chapter: Axiom of Resistance

[^392]: https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/09/big-in-venezuela/534177/

[^393]: Chapter: Relay Fallacy

[^394]: Chapter: Risk Sharing Principle

[^395]: Chapter: Balance of Power Fallacy

[^396]: https://www.federalreserve.gov

[^397]: Chapter: State Banking Principle

[^398]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Debasement

[^399]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Legal_tender

[^400]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federal_Reserve_Note

[^401]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^402]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Executive_Order_6102

[^403]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Monetary_Fund

[^404]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_banking

[^405]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Speed_of_light

[^406]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost

[^407]: Chapter: Pooling Pressure Risk

[^408]: Chapter: Variance Discount Flaw

[^409]: Chapter: Axiom of Resistance

[^410]: http://bitcoinfibre.org

[^411]: https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/blockstream-satellite-broadcasting-bitcoin-space

[^412]: Chapter: Zero Sum Property

[^413]: https://www.cs.cornell.edu/\~ie53/publications/btcProcFC.pdf

[^414]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Straw_man

[^415]: Chapter: Pooling Pressure Risk

[^416]: Chapter: Proximity Premium Flaw

[^417]: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf

[^418]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Incentive_compatibility

[^419]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_deviation

[^420]: Chapter: Pooling Pressure Risk

[^421]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_email_spam

[^422]: Chapter: Risk Sharing Principle

[^423]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operating_cash_flow

[^424]: https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/P2Pool

[^425]: Chapter: Pooling Pressure Risk

[^426]: Chapter: Proximity Premium Flaw

[^427]: Chapter: Axiom of Resistance

[^428]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero-sum_game

[^429]: Chapter: Pooling Pressure Risk

[^430]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Closed_system

[^431]: Chapter: Proximity Premium Flaw

[^432]: Chapter: Variance Discount Flaw

[^433]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economies_of_scale

[^434]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subsidy

[^435]: Chapter: Threat Level Paradox

[^436]: http://gavinandresen.ninja/a-definition-of-bitcoin

[^437]: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf

[^438]: Chapter: Cryptodynamic Principles

[^439]: Chapter: Brand Arrogation

[^440]: https://bitcoin.org/en/bitcoin-core

[^441]: https://libbitcoin.info

[^442]: Chapter: Maximalism Definition

[^443]: Chapter: Custodial Risk Principle

[^444]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trusted_third_party

[^445]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptographic_hash_function

[^446]: Chapter: Risk Sharing Principle

[^447]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Executive_Order_6102

[^448]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^449]: Chapter: Cryptodynamic Principles

[^450]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^451]: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf

[^452]: Chapter: Utility Threshold Property

[^453]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^454]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gresham%27s_law\#Reverse_of_Gresham\'s_law\_(Thiers\'\_law)

[^455]: Chapter: Fragmentation Principle

[^456]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dumping\_(pricing_policy)

[^457]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subsidyhttps://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subsidy

[^458]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Price_elasticity_of_demand

[^459]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marginal_utility

[^460]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hoarding\_(economics)

[^461]: https://mises.org/blog/problem-hoarding

[^462]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^463]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barter

[^464]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goods_and_services

[^465]: Chapter: Consolidation Principle

[^466]: Chapter: Network Effect Fallacy

[^467]: Chapter: Dumping Fallacy

[^468]: Chapter: Replay Protection Fallacy

[^469]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Net_present_value

[^470]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bootstrapping

[^471]: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0050.mediawiki

[^472]: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0066.mediawiki

[^473]: https://cointelegraph.com/news/miners-lost-over-50000-from-the-bitcoin-hardfork-last-weekend

[^474]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero-day\_(computing)

[^475]: https://www.reddit.com/r/btc/comments/6z827o/chris_jeffrey_jj_discloses_bitcoin_attack_vector/

[^476]: Chapter: Proof of Stake Fallacy

[^477]: Chapter: Censorship Resistance Property

[^478]: Chapter: Substitution Principle

[^479]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metcalfe%27s_law

[^480]: Chapter: Consolidation Principle

[^481]: Chapter: Side Fee Fallacy

[^482]: https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/pp/1054

[^483]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^484]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^485]: Chapter: Censorship Resistance Property

[^486]: Chapter: Axiom of Resistance

[^487]: https://eprint.iacr.org/2017/893.pdf

[^488]: Chapter: Energy Waste Fallacy

[^489]: Chapter: Pooling Pressure Risk

[^490]: Chapter: Proof of Memory FaÃ§ade

[^491]: Chapter: Energy Waste Fallacy

[^492]: Chapter: Censorship Resistance Property

[^493]: Chapter: Other Means Principle

[^494]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stock_dilution

[^495]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demurrage

[^496]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Net_present_value

[^497]: Chapter: Cryptodynamic Principles

[^498]: Chapter: Value Proposition

[^499]: Chapter: Proof of Stake Fallacy

[^500]: Chapter: Axiom of Resistance

[^501]: Chapter: Proof of Memory FaÃ§ade

[^502]: Chapter: Credit Expansion Fallacy

[^503]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^504]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^505]: Chapter: State Banking Principle

[^506]: https://www.frbdiscountwindow.org

[^507]: https://www.fdic.gov/resources/deposit-insurance

[^508]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_preference

[^509]: Chapter: Dumping Fallacy

[^510]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hoarding\_(economics)

[^511]: Chapter: Replay Protection Fallacy

[^512]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Net_present_value

[^513]: Chapter: Consolidation Principle

[^514]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^515]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation

[^516]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fractional-reserve_banking

[^517]: Chapter: Depreciation Principle

[^518]: https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/996

[^519]: Chapter: Reserve Currency Fallacy

[^520]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign-exchange_reserves

[^521]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_supply\#United_States

[^522]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_supply\#Money_creation_by_commercial_banks

[^523]: Chapter: State Banking Principle

[^524]: https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h3/current/default.htm

[^525]: https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/MABMM301USM189S

[^526]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bank_account

[^527]: https://www.forbes.com/sites/kevinmcpartland/2018/10/11/understanding-us-bond-market/

[^528]: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/cm.mkt.lcap.cd

[^529]: https://www.quora.com/What-is-the-estimated-total-value-of-all-US-private-companies

[^530]: https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h3/current/default.htm

[^531]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reserve_requirement

[^532]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reserve_requirement\#United_States

[^533]: https://www.fdic.gov

[^534]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_banking

[^535]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_market_fund

[^536]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_market_account

[^537]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Settlement

[^538]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Credit_card

[^539]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cheque

[^540]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Net_asset_value

[^541]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bank_run

[^542]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fungibility

[^543]: https://www.investopedia.com/articles/mutualfund/08/money-market-break-buck.asp

[^544]: https://wiki.mises.org/wiki/Money_substitutes

[^545]: Chapter: Savings Relation

[^546]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_preference

[^547]: Chapter: Unlendable Money Fallacy

[^548]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usury

[^549]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loan_shark

[^550]: Chapter: Production and Consumption

[^551]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Depreciation\_(economics)

[^552]: https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/974

[^553]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waste

[^554]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bond\_(finance)\#Principal

[^555]: https://www.schroders.com/en/insights/global-investor-study/investors-expect-returns-of-10.2-with-millennials-hoping-for-more

[^556]: https://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/global-economic-prospects

[^557]: https://www.oecd.org/sdd/productivity-stats/35409605.pdf

[^558]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^559]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Use_value

[^560]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goods

[^561]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost

[^562]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demurrage\_(currency)

[^563]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation

[^564]: Chapter: Unlendable Money Fallacy

[^565]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Labor_theory_of_value

[^566]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catallactics

[^567]: Chapter: Production and Consumption

[^568]: Chapter: Depreciation Principle

[^569]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turing_test

[^570]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-aggression_principle

[^571]: Chapter: Time Preference Fallacy

[^572]: Chapter: Labor and Leisure

[^573]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fractional-reserve_banking

[^574]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^575]: Chapter: Thin Air Fallacy

[^576]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Full-reserve_banking

[^577]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Murray_Rothbard

[^578]: https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html

[^579]: https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/pp/1086

[^580]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Safe_deposit_box

[^581]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Savings_account

[^582]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_deposit

[^583]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transaction_account

[^584]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representative_money

[^585]: https://wiki.mises.org/wiki/Money_substitutes

[^586]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/State_bank

[^587]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_bank

[^588]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_certificate

[^589]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silver_certificate

[^590]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_Reserve_Act

[^591]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ludwig_von_Mises

[^592]: https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/996

[^593]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jes%C3%BAs_Huerta_de_Soto\#Austrian_business_cycle_and_full_reserve_banking

[^594]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-aggression_principle

[^595]: https://www.reuters.com/article/zimbabwe-crisis-cbank/zimbabwe-c-bank-says-raided-private-bank-accounts-idUSLK23553320090420

[^596]: https://www.fdic.gov/

[^597]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Settlement\_(finance)

[^598]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Credit_card_fraud

[^599]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cheque_clearing

[^600]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chargeback

[^601]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Merchant_account\#Discount_rates

[^602]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fedwire

[^603]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ATM_usage_fees

[^604]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflation

[^605]: Chapter: Credit Expansion Fallacy

[^606]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_mining

[^607]: Chapter: Time Preference Fallacy

[^608]: https://www.chase.com/content/dam/chasecom/en/checking/documents/deposit_account_agreement.pdf

[^609]: Chapter: Risk Free Return Fallacy

[^610]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_banking

[^611]: Chapter: Thin Air Fallacy

[^612]: https://www.federalreserve.gov/faqs/currency_12771.htm

[^613]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Counterfeit

[^614]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crisis_in_Venezuela

[^615]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation

[^616]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^617]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^618]: https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/1107

[^619]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Purchasing_power

[^620]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proportionality\_(mathematics)

[^621]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation

[^622]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflation

[^623]: https://mises.org/library/human-action-0/html/pp/778

[^624]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Supply_and_demand

[^625]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost

[^626]: https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/pp/1054

[^627]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deflation

[^628]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nicolaus_Copernicus

[^629]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantity_theory_of_money

[^630]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Cantillon

[^631]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Cantillon\#Monetary_theory

[^632]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^633]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neutrality_of_money

[^634]: https://mises.org/library/human-action-0/html

[^635]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ludwig_von_Mises

[^636]: https://mises.org/library/human-action-0/html/pp/778

[^637]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tautology\_(logic)

[^638]: Chapter: Production and Consumption

[^639]: Chapter: Labor and Leisure

[^640]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stimulus\_(economics)

[^641]: Chapter: Regression Fallacy

[^642]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^643]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catallactics

[^644]: Chapter: Speculative Consumption

[^645]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pump_and_dump

[^646]: Chapter: Time Preference Fallacy

[^647]: Chapter: Savings Relation

[^648]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Use_value

[^649]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fungibility

[^650]: Chapter: Dumping Fallacy

[^651]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Action_axiom

[^652]: Chapter: Production and Consumption

[^653]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goods_and_services

[^654]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waste

[^655]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Murray_Rothbard

[^656]: https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/926

[^657]: Chapter: Expression Principle

[^658]: Chapter: Time Preference Fallacy

[^659]: Chapter: Pure Bank

[^660]: Chapter: Reservation Principle

[^661]: Chapter: Depreciation Principle

[^662]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Present_value

[^663]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Action_axiom

[^664]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goods_and_services

[^665]: Chapter: Depreciation Principle

[^666]: Chapter: Labor and Leisure

[^667]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waste

[^668]: Chapter: Pure Bank

[^669]: Chapter: Reserve Definition

[^670]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dividend

[^671]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charity\_(practice)

[^672]: https://www.usaa.com

[^673]: https://investor.vanguard.com

[^674]: https://wiki.mises.org/wiki/Money_substitutes

[^675]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demand_deposit

[^676]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_market_fund

[^677]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bank_run

[^678]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_market_fund\#Breaking_the_buck

[^679]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_banking

[^680]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federal_Reserve

[^681]: https://www.fdic.gov

[^682]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discount_window

[^683]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^684]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^685]: Chapter: Inflation Principle

[^686]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflation

[^687]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deflation

[^688]: Chapter: Time Preference Fallacy

[^689]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arbitrage

[^690]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demurrage\_(currency)

[^691]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Settlement\_(finance)

[^692]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maturity\_(finance)

[^693]: Chapter: Depreciation Principle

[^694]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost

[^695]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compound_interest

[^696]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reserve_requirement

[^697]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capital_requirement

[^698]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Debt_ratio

[^699]: https://www.chase.com/content/dam/chasecom/en/checking/documents/deposit_account_agreement.pdf

[^700]: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/performance_drag.asp

[^701]: Chapter: Savings Relation

[^702]: Chapter: Inflation Principle

[^703]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Golden_Rule_savings_rate

[^704]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fisher_equation

[^705]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goods

[^706]: Chapter: Time Preference Fallacy

[^707]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catallactics

[^708]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Murray_Rothbard

[^709]: https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/989

[^710]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capital_requirement

[^711]: Chapter: Expression Principle

[^712]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marginal_utility

[^713]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Present_value

[^714]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_value_of_money

[^715]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost

[^716]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value

[^717]: Chapter: Depreciation Principle

[^718]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catallactics

[^719]: https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/926

[^720]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy

[^721]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy\#Work_and_potential_energy

[^722]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subsistence_economy

[^723]: https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/939

[^724]: https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/992

[^725]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value

[^726]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost

[^727]: https://mises.org/wire/problem-hoarding

[^728]: Chapter: Savings Relation

[^729]: Chapter: Time Preference Fallacy

[^730]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Game_of_chance

[^731]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Market_timing

[^732]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cost_of_carry

[^733]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Present_value

[^734]: Chapter: Depreciation Principle

[^735]: Chapter: Full Reserve Fallacy

[^736]: Chapter: Credit Expansion Fallacy

[^737]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^738]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salaryman

[^739]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflation

[^740]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value

[^741]: Chapter: Credit Expansion Fallacy

[^742]: Chapter: Time Preference Fallacy

[^743]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^744]: Chapter: Inflation Principle

[^745]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_preference

[^746]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axiom

[^747]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value

[^748]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Preference\#Economics

[^749]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catallactics

[^750]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marginal_utility

[^751]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stimulus\_(economics)

[^752]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-aggression_principle

[^753]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/LGBT_rights_by_country_or_territory

[^754]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marriage_promotion

[^755]: https://futurism.com/in-order-to-ensure-human-survival-we-must-become-a-multi-planetary-species

[^756]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Game_of_chance

[^757]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost

[^758]: Chapter: Speculative Consumption

[^759]: Chapter: Regression Fallacy

[^760]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Use_value

[^761]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barter

[^762]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Medium_of_exchange

[^763]: https://mises.org/library/human-action-0/html/pp/778

[^764]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^765]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commodity

[^766]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tautology\_(logic)

[^767]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^768]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Currency

[^769]: https://wiki.mises.org/wiki/Money_substitutes

[^770]: https://wiki.mises.org/wiki/Money_substitutes\#Nature

[^771]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Circular_reasoning

[^772]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representative_money

[^773]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_certificate

[^774]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Counterfeit

[^775]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^776]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Use_value

[^777]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value

[^778]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clearing\_(finance)

[^779]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_Reserve_Act

[^780]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federal_Reserve

[^781]: Chapter: Credit Expansion Fallacy

[^782]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Promissory_note

[^783]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commodity_money

[^784]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Set-off\_(law)\#Close_out_netting

[^785]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turtles_all_the_way_down

[^786]: http://sites.stat.psu.edu/\~gjb6/nash/money.pdf

[^787]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflation

[^788]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ideal_money

[^789]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value

[^790]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Legal_tender

[^791]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^792]: Chapter: Stability Property

[^793]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fiat_money

[^794]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gresham%27s_law

[^795]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nicole_Oresme

[^796]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gresham%27s_law\#Reverse_of_Gresham\'s_law\_(Thiers\'\_law)

[^797]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_exchange_controls

[^798]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capital_flight

[^799]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation

[^800]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Purchasing_power

[^801]: Chapter: Inflation Principle

[^802]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost

[^803]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Use_value

[^804]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Let_there_be_light\#Origin_and_etymology

[^805]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commodity_money

[^806]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value

[^807]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trusted_timestamping

[^808]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Venezuelan_bol%C3%ADvar\#Bol%C3%ADvar_fuerte_2

[^809]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gresham%27s_law

[^810]: https://wiki.mises.org/wiki/Money_substitutes

[^811]: https://financial-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/Contractual+Claim

[^812]: Chapter: Debt Loop Fallacy

[^813]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Securitization

[^814]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Banknote

[^815]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_certificate

[^816]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representative_money

[^817]: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/e/electronic-money.asp

[^818]: Chapter: Regression Fallacy

[^819]: https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/pp/1054

[^820]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^821]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Counterfeit_money

[^822]: https://www.moneyfactory.gov

[^823]: https://monopoly.fandom.com/wiki/Monopoly_Money

[^824]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zimbabwean_dollar

[^825]: Chapter: Cryptodynamic Principles

[^826]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Currency

[^827]: Chapter: Credit Expansion Fallacy

[^828]: Chapter: Reserve Definition

[^829]: https://wiki.mises.org/wiki/Regression_theorem

[^830]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^831]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Use_value

[^832]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barter

[^833]: https://mises.org/library/human-action-0/html/pp/778

[^834]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value

[^835]: Chapter: Collectible Tautology

[^836]: https://mises.org/library/cryptocurrencies-and-wider-regression-theorem

[^837]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catallactics

[^838]: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf

[^839]: Chapter: Depreciation Principle

[^840]: Chapter: Savings Relation

[^841]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Settlement\_(finance)

[^842]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_certificate

[^843]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asset%E2%80%93liability_mismatch

[^844]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maturity\_(finance)

[^845]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Risk-free_interest_rate

[^846]: Chapter: Credit Expansion Fallacy

[^847]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Covenant\_(law)

[^848]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maturity\_(finance)

[^849]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost

[^850]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hashcash

[^851]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Denial-of-service_attack

[^852]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule_of_72

[^853]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fractional-reserve_banking

[^854]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^855]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_banking

[^856]: https://cdn.evbuc.com/eventlogos/67785745/turner.pdf

[^857]: Chapter: Full Reserve Fallacy

[^858]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representative_money

[^859]: Chapter: Credit Expansion Fallacy

[^860]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflation

[^861]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clearing\_(finance)

[^862]: https://wiki.mises.org/wiki/Money_substitutes

[^863]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^864]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_panning

[^865]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maturity\_(finance)

[^866]: https://www.wolframalpha.com/input/?i=sum+of+m+\*+(1-r)%5En+as+n+goes+from+1+to+infinity

[^867]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reserve_requirement

[^868]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_multiplier

[^869]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ledger

[^870]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Balance_sheet

[^871]: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1057521915001477

[^872]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Credit_theory_of_money\#Scholarship

[^873]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plato

[^874]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aristotle

[^875]: https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/duality

[^876]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talking_past_each_other

[^877]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Use_value

[^878]: Chapter: Value Proposition

[^879]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metallism

[^880]: Chapter: Regression Fallacy

[^881]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chartalism

[^882]: Chapter: Debt Loop Fallacy

[^883]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bank_failure

[^884]: https://www.brinks.com/en/public/brinks/logistics

[^885]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automated_teller_machine

[^886]: https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/empty_promise

[^887]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IzE038REw2k

[^888]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bank_run

[^889]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_bank

[^890]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lender_of_last_resort

[^891]: Chapter: State Banking Principle

[^892]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation

[^893]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fisher_equation

[^894]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation

[^895]: Chapter: Depreciation Principle

[^896]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^897]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^898]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deflation

[^899]: Chapter: Inflation Principle

[^900]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflation

[^901]: Chapter: Time Preference Fallacy

[^902]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marginal_utility

[^903]: Chapter: Speculative Consumption

[^904]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metcalfe%27s_law

[^905]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gresham%27s_law\#Reverse_of_Gresham\'s_law\_(Thiers\'\_law)

[^906]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Supply_and_demand

[^907]: https://medium.com/\@paulbars/magic-internet-money-how-a-reddit-ad-made-bitcoin-hit-1000-and-inspired-south-parks-art-b414ec7a5598

[^908]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^909]: Chapter: Depreciation Principle

[^910]: Chapter: Stability Property

[^911]: https://www.fool.com/investing/2017/05/25/could-the-price-of-bitcoin-go-to-1-million.aspx

[^912]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gross_world_product

[^913]: https://medium.com/\@100trillionUSD/modeling-bitcoins-value-with-scarcity-91fa0fc03e25

[^914]: Chapter: Stock to Flow Fallacy

[^915]: Chapter: Reservation Principle

[^916]: Chapter: Reserve Currency Fallacy

[^917]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catallactics

[^918]: https://mises.org/library/man-economy-and-state-power-and-market/html/p/949

[^919]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^920]: Chapter: Credit Expansion Fallacy

[^921]: Chapter: Time Preference Fallacy

[^922]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_bank

[^923]: Chapter: State Banking Principle

[^924]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Settlement\_(finance)

[^925]: Chapter: Debt Loop Fallacy

[^926]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_supply\#United_States

[^927]: https://seekingalpha.com/article/4202768-u-s-percent-world-stock-market-cap-tops-40-percent

[^928]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation

[^929]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economic_growth

[^930]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Net_present_value

[^931]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule_of_72

[^932]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost

[^933]: Chapter: Permissionless Principle

[^934]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^935]: https://voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/7964

[^936]: Chapter: Stability Property

[^937]: Chapter: Substitution Principle

[^938]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scarcity

[^939]: Chapter: Inflation Principle

[^940]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mona_Lisa

[^941]: Chapter: Stability Property

[^942]: Chapter: Substitution Principle

[^943]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money\#Properties

[^944]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^945]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Counterfeit_money

[^946]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^947]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subjective_theory_of_value

[^948]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Supply_and_demand

[^949]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Damping_ratio

[^950]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commodity

[^951]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^952]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bitcoin

[^953]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_mining

[^954]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demurrage\_(currency)

[^955]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sovereignty

[^956]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seigniorage

[^957]: https://www.reuters.com/article/us-venezuela-economy/crisis-hit-venezuela-halts-publication-of-another-major-indicator-idUSKBN16S1YF

[^958]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/State_monopoly

[^959]: Chapter: Reservation Principle

[^960]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capital_flight

[^961]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_exchange_controls

[^962]: Chapter: Utility Threshold Property

[^963]: Chapter: Substitution Principle

[^964]: Chapter: Scalability Principle

[^965]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stock_and_flow

[^966]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monetary_inflation

[^967]: https://mises.org/library/theory-money-and-credit/html/ppp/1234

[^968]: Chapter: Reservation Principle

[^969]: Chapter: Reservation Principle

[^970]: Chapter: Reserve Currency Fallacy

[^971]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scalability

[^972]: Chapter: Centralization Risk

[^973]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost

[^974]: Chapter: Money Taxonomy

[^975]: Chapter: Utility Threshold Property

[^976]: Chapter: Stability Property

[^977]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Substitute_good

[^978]: Chapter: Stability Property

[^979]: Chapter: Consolidation Principle

[^980]: Chapter: Bitcoin Labels
